For a quick impression of how MonetDB/XQuery is used, we 
recommend reading the @url{_ROOTDIR_/XQuery/Version4/QuickTour,QuickTour} first. 

The documentation is organized by feature area:
@itemize
@item 
The @ref{Supported Features} section 
describes which features from the various W3C standard recommendations
have been implemented, and which not. You will find that MonetDB/XQuery
is very standard-conformant already at this stage.
@item 
Adding XML documents to a database, as well as deleting them, is 
not yet covered by the W3C. Thus, MonetDB/XQuery provides its own interface 
for such @url{Document Management} tasks.
@item 
The @url{APIs} section describes how users and application 
programmers can interact with MonetDB/XQuery, either by invoking the
the <tt>MapiClient</tt> utility on XQuery scripts, or by querying
the MonetDB/XQuery server from a client program. We also describe
how to use MonetDB/XQuery as XML database backbone behind a web server.
@item 
@url{PreparedQueries} to accelerate repetitive 
fast-running queries, are a well-known feature in SQL databases.  
MonetDB/XQuery uses XQuery user-defined functions, defined in library 
modules (standard features in W3C XQuery 1.0) to bring the benefits of 
prepared queries also to XML database systems.
@item 
@url{StandOff Extensions} introduce new  XPath steps to 
ease querying of XML documents with so-called <b>region-annotations</b>.  
The decision to extend a W3C standard is not taken lightly, and was only 
done after users from widely different backgrounds found these extensions 
critical. Also, these extensions are <b>turned off by default</b> and need 
to be actived explicitly by starting the MonetDB/XQuery server with the 
<tt>--set standoff=enable</tt> command-line switch.
@end itemize

@subsection Troubleshooting
@itemize
@item Our 
@url{_ROOTDIR_/Download/Trouble/XQuery/index.shtml,FAQ}
lists of known problems (along with their answers) concerning the MonetDB/XQuery
software and its installation.
@item Readers of the 
@url{http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/monetdb-users,monetdb-users}
mailing list at SourceForge will be glad to assist you in using
MonetDB/XQuery.
@item If you think you found a bug, (and double checked it against
the language specification) it can be submitted to the <a
@url{http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=56967&amp;atid=482468,bug
tracking system} at SourceForge.
@end itemize
