@subsection XQuery Implementation
MonetDB/XQuery is an implementation of the XQuery standard as it is set by
the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).  It is also the source for the XQuery
language documentation, and, therefore, not reproduced here. 

The following W3C material is recommended:
@itemize
@item
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xquery,W3C XQuery 1.0} now full standard recommendation.
@item
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xpath20,W3C XPath 2.0} the XML navigation sub-language, common to both XQuery and XSLT.
@item
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xpath-functions,W3C XQuery Functions and Operators} provides
an overview of all built-in functions.
@item
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xquery-semantics,W3C XQuery Update Facility}
is a proposal in-the-works for updating XML documents.
@end itemize

Additional W3C reference material:
@itemize
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xmlschema-2,W3C XML Schema 2.0} note that
schema support in MonetDB/XQuery is untested at this point.
@item
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xslt-xquery-serialization,W3C XQuery Serialization}
defines how XML documents should be converted to text.
@item
@url{http://www.w3c.org/TR/xquery-semantics,W3C XQuery Formal Semantics}
formally defines the behavior of all XQuery language constructs.
@end itemize

@subsection XQuery Coverage

Most of the XQuery language specification is
already supported in this  release. However, a few functions/aspects of XQuery
are still  @url{XQuery,missing}. The 
@url{../../../../Developer/Roadmap/XQuery,roadmap} provides a glance 
on the plans to fill the holes.

@subsection XML Updates

The MonetDB/XQuery development team is quite advanced with an 
implementation of the latest W3C candidate recommendation of the 
@url{XUpdate,XQuery Update Facility}
This feature will be support in the next release.
