When starting the MonetDB Server, this will open a network 
port on your system (the @code{mapi_port}, configurable in 
@code{MonetDB.conf}, by default 50000).
If the database is to be accessible from the outside, you must modify
your firewall configuration to open this port.

Before doing so, take note of the following issues:
@itemize
@item
Currently, MonetDB/XQuery lackes proper authentication.
There is a single user with administrative rights and 
fixed passwords, and the SSL is not available yet.
This will be fixed by the the upcoming @strong{version 5}
port of MonetDB/XQuery.
@item
As a stop-gap measure, XML documents that have not explicitly 
been loaded via @url{../../DocMgmt,@code{shred_doc()}}
(and thus carry a respective alias) are @emph{only} accessible if 
the @code{MapiClient} connection comes from the same machine 
where @code{Mserver} runs (i.e., for clients that run on the 
local machine).  Otherwise, all XML content readable by the user
that started the Mserver process would be visible for the outside.

@item
Finally, the MonetDB server was not designed with security as a 
first goal, so may be susceptible to e.g. buffer overrun attacks. 
Thus, while in principle users are just able to execute XQueries, 
an open port could in the worst case lead to your computer being hacked.
@end itemize
@strong{Warning:} As a consequence, anybody logged in to the machine where 
@code{Mserver} runs can now read documents with the permissions of the user that 
started @code{Mserver}!
