@chapter About this manual
This is the MonetDB kernel implementation notes manual.
The notes are extracted from the source code, where
they are located in the same file as the actual implementation.

The manual is produced from a Texinfo framework file, which collects
and organizes bits-and-pieces of information from the source distribution. 
Since the system is under constant development,
there is no guarantee of consistency
between the documentation of the individual system components.
Suggestions and help from end-users in this area is appreciated.

The Texinfo file is turned into a HTML browse-able version using 
@emph{makeinfo} program. It can also be used to produce
a Postscript version using @emph{tex2dvi} followed by 
@emph{dvips}. The PDF version can be produced from the Postscript
using @emph{ps2pdf}.
Alternative formats, e.g. XML and DocBook format, can be
readily obtained from the Texinfo file.

This copyright(2004) and the MonetDB logo are owned by CWI.
Other trademarks and copyrights referred to in this manual are
the property of their respective owners.

@emph{Disclaimer} The reference manual is still under development,
much like the underlying source code base. This may lead to inconsistencies,
for which we apologize in advance. You can help improving the manual
using the user commentary system included in the web-site.
@menu
* Intended audience::
* How to read this manual::
* Features and Limitations::
@detailmenu
* When to consider MonetDB::
* When not to consider MonetDB::
@end detailmenu
* The History of MonetDB::
* Manual Generation::
* Software Versions::
* Conventions and Notation::
@end menu

@node Intended audience, How to read this manual, About this manual, About this manual
@section Intended Audience
The information contained in the manual is purposely dense and geared
at users with a need to understand the implementation decisions and
constraints of the MonetDB system.
A background in C and Linux-facilities is assumed.

The manual does not contain a general introduction to MonetDB or
relational DBMS technology, the query languages SQL and Xquery, or 
the application programming interfaces JDBC and ODBC. 
We refer to the related MonetDB documentation papers on these topics.

@node How to read this manual, Features and Limitations, Intended audience, About this manual
@section How to Read This Manual
The reference manual covers a lot of ground which at first reading
may be slightly confusing. The material is presented  in a top-down fashion,
starting at the SQL application layer, following the software stack,
to the low-level data structures and operations.
Forward references are included frequently to point into the right
direction for additional information.

First time users of MonetDB should read (@ref{Download 
and Installation} and @ref{SQL}. It prepares the ground to develop
applications using the database language intergalactica.
Advance topics for application builders is given in @ref{Application
Interfaces} and the novel query language @ref{XQuery}.

If you already know SQL and are interested in technical details
of the MonetDB system, you should start reading @ref{MonetDB Overview}.
From there two tracks are possible. The @ref{MonetDB Assembler Language}
and following sections describe the abstract machine and optimizations
taken to improve processing speed.
It is relevant for a better understanding of the query processing 
behavior and provides an entry point to built new languages on top
of the database kernel. 

The second track The Inner Core describes the datastructures
and operations exploited in the abstract machine layer. This part
is essential for developers to aid in bug fixing and to
extend the kernel with new functionality.
For most readers, however, it can be skipped without causing
problems to develop efficient applications.

