@subsection DbVisualizer
DbVisualizer is a platform independent tool aimed to simplify database 
development and management for database administrators and developers.
It's a very cool tool (can even draw dependency graphs based 
on the schema and foreign keys.

Free, personal use versions are available from their
@url{http://www.minq.se/,website}.
Download and install the software.
The following scheme works for their versions 5.1.

After starting DbVisualizer for the first time, it will load its
default welcome screen.
Before doing anything, open the Driver Manager, using the menu
Tools->Driver Manager...
In the Driver Manager add a new Driver using Driver->Create Driver...
Type the name of the driver in the Name field, e.g. MonetDB.
Type the URL format for the driver: jdbc:monetdb://hostname/database.
In the Driver File Paths box, follow the directions to load a JAR
file that contains the JDBC driver.  Use the MonetDB JDBC driver
that came with your distribution, typically installed in
$@verb{ { }prefix @verb{ } }/share/MonetDB/lib/monetdb-X.Y-jdbc.jar.

After adding, the window should list the driver class
nl.cwi.monetdb.jdbc.MonetDriver and automatically fills it in in the
Driver Class field.  Close the Driver Manager window.
Back in the main window, in the Getting Started box, click the
Tools->Connection Wizard link.
A connection Wizard will pop up, and you will think you are working
on a Microsoft Powered computer, no matter which operating system you
use.
Type the name for the database, e.g. MonetDB and click "Next".
Select the just added monetdb Database Driver from the drop down
list and again press "Next".
Go grab a cup of coffee, when you found out the Wizard not only looks
like a Microsoft Product(tm), but also acts like one.  Try to hide
your frustration and cancel the Wizard and continue the manual way.

From the menu select Database->Create Database Connection.  A pop-up
dialog will try to pursue you to use the wizard.  You know better so,
click "No".
Fill in the name for the connection in the Alias field, e.g. MonetDB.
Select the monetdb driver from the list.
Copy the default URL by clicking on the "URL Format: ..." text field
and change it to reflect the right hostname (usually localhost will
do).
Fill in the default userid and password (monetdb).
Press the "Connect" button.  It will report the database being used
and the JDBC driver in use.  In the left pane the monetdb database
now becomes available from browsing.

Explore the application and have fun!

A caveat of the free-version system is its performance on SQL
scripts. They are sent as a single string to the server for
execution. This is not the most optimal situation for MonetDB.
Running a batch script is better started from the MonetDB
SQL client.
