@section Features and Limitations

In this section we give a short overview of the key features to
(not) consider the MonetDB product family.
In a nutshell, its origin
in the area of data-mining and data-warehousing makes
it an ideal choice for high volume, complex query dominant applications.
MonetDB was not designed for high-volume secure OLTP settings initially.

It is important to recognize that the MonetDB language interfaces are
primarily aimed at
experienced system programmers and administrators. End-users are
advised to use any of the open-source graphical SQL workbenches to
interact with the system.

@menu
* MonetDB Pro's::
* MonetDB Con's::
* Key Features::
* Size Limitations ::
@end menu

@node MonetDB Pro's, MonetDB Con's, Features and Limitations, Features and Limitations
@subsection When to consider MonetDB ?
@strong{A high-performance database management system.}
MonetDB is an easy accessible open-source DBMS for SQL-[XQuery-]based
applications and database research projects.
Its origin goes back over a decade, when we decided that the database hotset
- the part used by the applications - can be largely held in main-memory
or where a few columns of a broad relational table are sufficient to
handle a request.
Further exploitation of cache-conscious algorithms proved
the validity of these design decisions.

@strong{A multi-model system.}
MonetDB supports multiple query language front-ends. Aside from
its proprietary language, called the MonetDB Assembler Language (MAL),
it aims at ANSI SQL-2003 and W3C XQuery/XUpdate. Their underlying logical
data model and computational scheme differs widely. The system is designed
to provide a common ground for both languages and it is prepared to support
languages based on yet another data model or processing paradigm 
e.g. SPARQL.

@strong{A binary-relation database kernel.}
MonetDB is built on the canonical representation of database
containers, called Binary Association Tables (BATs). 
The datastructures are geared towards efficient representation
when they mimic a n-ary relational scheme.

This led to an architecture where the traditional page-pool is
replaced by one with a much larger granularity based on BATs.
They are sizeable entities -up to hundreds of megabytes- swapped 
into memory upon need.
The benefit of this approach has been shown in numerous papers
in the scientific literature.

@strong{A broad spectrum database system.}
MonetDB is continuously developed to support a broad application
field. Although originally developed for Analytical CRM products,
it is now being used at the low-end scale as an embedded
relational kernel and projects are underway to tackle the huge
database problems encountered in scientific databases, e.g. astronomy.

@strong{An extendable database system.}
MonetDB has been strongly influenced by the scientific
experiments to understand the interplay between algorithms
and hardware features. It has turned MonetDB into an extensible
database system. It proves valuable in
those cases where an application specific and critical
component makes all the difference between slow and fast
implementation.

@strong{An opensource software system.}
MonetDB has been developed over many years of research at
@url{http://monetdb.cwi.nl/,CWI}, whose charter ensures that results
are easily accessible to others.
Either through publications in the scientific domain or publication of the
software components involved.
The @url{mailto:monetdb-users@@lists.sourceforge.net,MonetDB mailing list}
is the access point to a larger audience for advice.
A subscription to the mailing list helps the developer
team to justify the on-and-off office hours put into
MonetDB's development and maintenance.

@node MonetDB Con's, Key Features, MonetDB Pro's, Features and Limitations
@subsection When not to consider MonetDB ?
There are several areas where MonetDB has not yet built a reputation.
They are the prime candidates for experimentation, but also areas
where application construction may become risky. Mature products
or commercial support may then provide a short-term solution, 
while MonetDB programmers team works on filling the functional gaps.
The following areas should be considered with care:

@strong{Persistent object caches.}
The tendency to develop applications in Java and C/C++ based on
a persistent object model, is a no-go area for MonetDB. Much like the
other database engines, the overhead involved in individual
record access does not do justice to the data structures and
algorithms in the kernel. They are chosen to optimize bulk
processing, which always comes at a price for individual object access.

Nevertheless, MonetDB has been used from its early days in a commercial
application, where the programmers took
care in maintaining the Java object-cache. It is a route with great
benefits, but also one where sufficient manpower should be
devoted to perform a good job.

@strong{High-performance financial OLTP.}
MonetDB was originally not designed for highly concurrent transaction workloads.
For one reason it was decided to factor out the ACID techniques
and make them explicit in the query plans generated by the front-end compilers.
Given the abundance of main memory nowadays and the slack CPU cycles
to process database requests, it may be profitable to consider serial
execution of OLTP transactions.

The SQL implementation provides full transaction control and recovery.

@strong{Security.}
MonetDB has not been designed with a strong focus on security. 
The major precautions have been taken, but are incomplete
when access to the hosting machine is granted or when direct access
is granted to the Monet Assembler Language features.
The system is preferably deployed in a sand-boxed environment
where remote access is encapsulated in a dedicated application framework.

@strong{Scaling over multiple machines.}
MonetDB does not provide a centralized controlled, distributed database
infrastructure yet. Instead, we move towards an architecture where
multiple autonomous MonetDB instances are joining together to process
a large and distributed workload.

In the multimedia applications we have exploited successfully the inherent
data parallelism to speedup processing and reduce the synchronization cost.
The underlying platforms were Linux-based cluster computers with
sizeable main memories.

@node Key Features, Size Limitations , MonetDB Con's, Features and Limitations
@subsection What are the MonetDB key features
The list below provides a glimpse on the technical characteristics and
features of the MonetDB software packages.
For the SQL front-end:
@itemize @bullet
@item
It is based on the SQL'99 standard core including
support of foreign key constraints, nested queries.
(materialized) views.
@item
It supports Persistent Stored Modules, triggers and
user defined functions in C.
@item
It supports sequence types from the SQL'03 standard.
@end itemize

For the XQuery front-end:
@itemize @bullet
@item
The W3C XQuery standard is fully implemented.
@item
The XUpdate draft standard is being implemented.
@item
A XQuery remote procedure call mechanism.
@end itemize

The software characteristics for the MonetDB packages are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
The kernel source code is written in ANSI-C and POSIX compliant.
@item
The application interface libraries source code complies
with the latest language versions.
@item
The source code is written in a literate programming style, to stimulate
proximity of code and its documentation.
@item
The source code is compiled and tested on many platforms with different compiler
options to ensure portability.
@item
The source code is based on the GNU toolkit, e.g. Automake, Autoconf, and Libtool for portability.
@item
The source code is heavily tested on a daily basis, and scrutinized
using the @url{"http://www.valgrind.org",Valgrind} toolkit.
@end itemize
The heart is the MonetDB server, which comes with the following
innovative features.
@itemize @bullet
@item
A fully decomposed storage scheme using memory mapped files.
@item
It supports scalable databases, 32- and 64-bit platforms.
@item
Connectivity is provided through TCP/IP sockets and SSH on many platforms.
@item
Index selection, creation, and maintenance is automatic.
@item
The relational operators materialize their results and are self-optimizing.
@item
The operations are cache- and memory-aware with supreme performance.
@item
The database backend is multi-threaded and guards a single physical database
instance.
@end itemize
@node Size Limitations, A Brief History, Key Features, Features and Limitations
@subsection Size Limitations for MonetDB
The maximal database size supported by MonetBD depends on the underlying
processing platform, i.e. a 32- or 64-bit processor, and storage
device, i.e. the file system and disk raids.

@c table spaces
The number of columns per tables is practically unlimited.
Unlike traditional database systems, the storage space limitation depends
on the maximal size for an individual column. Each column is mapped to
a file, whose limit is dictated by the operating system and hardware platform.

@c concurrency
The number of concurrent user threads is a configuration parameter.
Middleware solutions are adviced to serialize access to the database
when large number of users are expected to access the database.

@c platform
