This section helps you to install the MonetDB source using Gentoo
on all platforms, MacOs in particular.
[To be documented by Fabian]

@subsubsection Prerequisites
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{CVS}
If you start with the source distribution from SourceForge you don't need CVS.
Otherwise, you need to have a working CVS.  For instructions, see
@url{http://sourceforge.net/docman/?group_id=1,docman}
and look under the heading CVS Instructions.
@item @emph{Python}
MonetDB uses Python (version 2.0.0 or better) during
configuration of the software.  See <a href="http://www.python.org/">
python.org</a> for more information.
@item @emph{autoconf/automake/libtool}
MonetDB uses GNU 
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/,autoconf} 
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/automake/,automake} and
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/,libtool} during 
configuration of the software. Libtool is also used during the build.

@item @emph{standard software development tools}
To compile MonetDB, you also need to have a the following 
standard software development tools installed and ready for use
on you system:
@itemize @bullet
@item a C/C++ compiler (e.g., GNU's gcc/g++)</li>
@item a lexical analyzer generator (e.g., "lex" or "flex")</li>
@item a parser generator (e.g., "yacc" or "bison")</li>
@item GNU make ("gmake") (native make's on, e.g., IRIX and Solaris usually don't work).
@end itemize

@item Mx, mel, and autogen
These tools are only needed if you are building from CVS. 
If you start with the source distribution from SourceForge you don't need this.
@item
@emph{disk space}
After downloading, MonetDB takes up about 40 MB of disk space;
compilation adds another 70 MB.  Testing takes about 45 MB, and
the installation about 20 MB (not including any databases).
@end itemize

