@section A Brief History of MonetDB
@strong{The Dark Ages [1979-1992]}
The development of the MonetDB software family goes back as far as the
early eighties when the first relational kernel, called Troll, was delivered to
a larger audience. It was spread over ca 1000 sites world-wide and became part
of a software case-tool until the beginning of the nineties.
@c not very comprehensive (what? until the beginning of the 90s?)
None of the code of this system has survived, but several ideas and
experiences on how to obtain a fast kernel by simplification and
explicit materialization found their origin during this period.

The second part of the eighties was spent on building the first
distributed main-memory database system in the context of the
@c main-memory vs. main memory ?? should do a grep on both
@c throughout the documentation and make the spelling consistent
national project 
@url{http://www.cwi.nl/themes/ins1/publications/docs/KeMaBoNe:EUROPAR:01.pdf,PRISMA}.
A fully functional system of 100
processors and a wealthy 1GB of main memory showed the road
to develop database technology from a different perspective.

@strong{The Early Days [1993-1995]}
Immediately after the PRISMA project was termed dead, 
a new database kernel based on Binary Association Tables (BATs) 
was laid out.
The original target was to aim for better support of scientific databases
with their then archaic file structures. 

@strong{The Data Distilleries Era [1996-2003]}
The datamining projects running as of 1993 called for better
database support. It culminated in the spin-off
Data Distilleries, which based their analytical customer
relationship suite on the power provided by the early MonetDB
implementations. In the years following, many technical innovations
were paired with strong industrial maturing of the software base.
Data Distilleries became a subsidiary of SPSS in 2003.

@strong{The Open-Source Challenge [2003-2006]}
Moving MonetDB Version 4 into the open-source field required a large number of
extensions to the code base. It became utmost important to
support a mature implementation of the SQL-99 standard,
and the bulk of application programming interfaces (PHP,JDBC,Perl,ODBC).
The culprit of this activity was the first official release in 2004
and the release of the XQuery front-end in 2005.

@strong{The Road Ahead [2006-}
This manual marks the alpha-release of MonetDB Version 5,
the result of a multi-year activity to clean up the software 
stack and to better support both simple and complex database requests.
(See @ref{Backward Compatibility})

@strong{The Future}
New versions in the MonetDB software family are under development.
Extensions and renovation of the kernel are studied in
the X100 project, which aims at high-volume access to
columns stored in compressed form. 
Its Volcano-style interpreter aims to provide 
performance in I/O-dominant and streaming settings using
vectorized processing and Just-In-Time (de)compression.

The scene of distributed database is (again) addressed in the Armada project,
but not using the traditional centralized administration focus. Instead
the Armada project seeks the frontiers of autonomous database systems, which
still provide a coherent functional view to its users.
In its approach it challenges many dogmas in distributed database technology,
such as the perspective on global consistency, the role of the client in
managing the distributed world, and the way resources are spread.

The MonetDB software framework provides a rich setting to pursue
these alleys of database research. We hope that many may benefit from
our investments, both research and business wise.
