@subsection Jdbc Client Calling Arguments
The textual client using the JDBC protocol
comes with several options to fine-tune the
interaction with the database server. A synopsis of the calling
arguments is given below
@example
mjclient [-h host[:port]] [-p port] \
		[-f file] [-u user] [-l language] [-b [database]] \
		[-d [table]] [-e] [-X<opt>]
@end example
but also using long option equivalents --host --port --file --user --language
--dump --echo --database are allowed.
Arguments may be written directly after the option like -p45123.

If no host and port are given, localhost and 45123 (=sql_port default)
are assumed.  An @code{.monetdb}
file may exist in the user's home directory.  This file can contain
preferences to use each time mjclient is started.  Options given on the
command line override the preferences file.  The @code{.monetdb} file syntax is
<option>=<value> where option is one of the options host, port, file, mode
debug, or password.  Note that the last one is perilous and therefore not
available as command line option.
If no input file is given using the -f flag, an interactive session is
started on the terminal.

OPTIONS
@table @code
@item -h --host  
The hostname of the host that runs the MonetDB database.  A port
number can be supplied by use of a colon, i.e. -h somehost:12345.
@item -p --port  
The port number to connect to.
@item -f --file  
A file name to use either for reading or writing.  The file will
be used for writing when dump mode is used (-d --dump).
In read mode, the file can also be an URL pointing to a plain
text file that is optionally gzip compressed.
@item -u --user  
The username to use when connecting to the database.
@item -l --language  
Use the given language, for example 'xquery'.
@item -d --dump  
Dumps the given table(s), or the complete database if none given.
@item --help     
This screen.
@item -e --echo  
Also outputs the contents of the input file, if any.
@item -b --database  
Try to connect to the given database (only makes sense
if connecting to a DatabasePool or equivalent process).
@end table

EXTRA OPTIONS
@table @code
@item -Xdebug    
Writes a transmission log to disk for debugging purposes.  If a
file name is given, it is used, otherwise a file called
monet<timestamp>.log is created.  A given file will never be
overwritten; instead a unique variation of the file is used.
@item -Xblksize  
Specifies the blocksize when using block mode, given in bytes.
@item -Xoutput   
The output mode when dumping.  Default is sql, xml may be used for
an experimental XML output.
@item -Xbatching 
Indicates that a batch should be used instead of direct
communication with the server for each statement.  If a number is
given, it is used as batch size.  I.e. 8000 would execute the
contents on the batch after each 8000 read rows.  Batching can
greatly speedup the process of restoring a database dump.
@end table
