The table below summarizes the first commentary line encountered in
the system associated with a MAL operation.

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8 
@item
@item aggr.avg
@tab grouped tail average on flt
@item aggr.count
@tab grouped count
@item aggr.max
@tab grouped tail maximum
@item aggr.min
@tab grouped tail minimum
@item aggr.prod
@tab Product over a grouped tail of flt
@item aggr.product
@tab grouped tail sum on lng
@item aggr.size
@tab grouped count of true values
@item aggr.sum
@tab Sum over a indexed grouped of tail values 
@item
@item alarm.alarm
@tab execute action in X secs
@item alarm.ctime
@tab current time as a string
@item alarm.epilogue
@tab Finalize alarm module
@item alarm.epoch
@tab current time as unix epoch
@item alarm.prelude
@tab Initialize alarm module
@item alarm.sleep
@tab sleep X secs
@item alarm.time
@tab time in millisecs
@item alarm.timers
@tab give a list of all active timers
@item alarm.usec
@tab return cpu microseconds info
@item
@item algebra.bandjoin
@tab This is a join() for which the predicate is that two BUNs match 
        if the left-tail value is within the range [right-head - minus, 
        right-head + plus]. Works only for the builtin numerical types, 
        and their derivates.
@item algebra.between
@item algebra.betweenCO
@item algebra.betweenOC
@item algebra.betweenOO
@item algebra.cardinality
@tab Return the cardinality of the BAT tail values.
@item algebra.copy
@tab Returns physical copy of a BAT.
@item aggr.count
@tab Return the number of elements currently in a BAT ignores 
        BUNs with nil-tail iff ignore_nils==TRUE.
@item aggr.count_no_nil
@tab Return the number of elements currently 
	in a BAT ignoring BUNs with nil-tail
@item algebra.difference
@item algebra.exist
@tab Returns true when 'h,t' occurs as a bun in b.
@item algebra.fetch
@tab Returns a positional selection of b by the oid 
        head values of s
@item algebra.fetchjoin
@tab Hook directly into the fetch implementation of the join.
@item algebra.find
@tab Returns the tail value 't' for which some [h,t] BUN 
        exists in b.  If no such BUN exists, an error occurs.
@item algebra.fragment
@tab Select both on head and tail range.
@item algebra.hashjoin
@tab Hook directly into the hash implementation of the join.
@item algebra.hashsplit
@tab Split a BAT on tail column according (hash-value MOD buckets). 
        Returns a recursive BAT, containing the fragments in the tail, 
        their bucket number in the head.
@item algebra.histogram
@tab Produce a BAT containing the histogram over the tail values.
@item algebra.indexjoin
@tab Hook directly into the index implementation of the join.
@item algebra.intersect
@item algebra.join
@tab Returns all BUNs, consisting of a head-value from 'left' and 
        a tail-value from 'right' for which there are BUNs in 'left' 
        and 'right' with equal tail- resp. head-value (i.e. the join
	columns are projected out).
@item algebra.joinPath
@tab Evaluate a join path.
@item algebra.kdiff
@tab Returns the difference taken over only the *head* columns of two BATs. 
        Results in all BUNs of 'left' that are *not* in 'right'. 
        It does *not* do double-elimination over the 'left' BUNs. 
        If you want this, use:
	 'kdifference(left.kunique,right.kunique)' 
	or: 'kdifference(left,right).kunique'.
@item algebra.kintersect
@tab Returns the intersection taken over only the *head* columns of two BATs. 
	Results in all BUNs of 'left' that are also in 'right'. 
        Does *not* do double- elimination over the 'left' BUNs.
		If you want this, use: 'kintersect(kunique(left),kunique(right))' 
	or: 'kunique(kintersect(left,right))'.
@item algebra.kunion
@tab Returns the union of two BATs; looking at head-columns only. 
        Results in all BUNs of 'left' that are  not in 'right', plus 
	all BUNs of 'right'.  *no* double-elimination is done. 
        If you want this, do:
	'kunion(left.kunique,right.kunique)' 
	or: 'sunion(left,right).kunique'.
@item algebra.kunique
@tab Select unique tuples from the input BAT.  Double elimination is 
        done only looking at the head column. The result is a BAT with
		property hkeyed() == true.
@item algebra.like
@tab Selects all elements that have 'substr' as in the tail.
@item algebra.markH
@tab Produces a new BAT with fresh unique dense sequense of OIDs in 
        the head that starts at base (i.e. [base,..base+b.count()-1] ).
@item algebra.markT
@tab Produces a BAT with fresh unique OIDs in the tail starting at 0.
@item aggr.max
@tab Give the highest tail value.
@item algebra.merge
@tab Merge head and tail into a single value
@item algebra.mergejoin
@tab Hook directly into the merge implementation of the join.
@item aggr.min
@tab Give the lowest tail value. 
@item algebra.number
@tab Produces a new BAT with identical head column, and consecutively 
        increasing integers (start at 0) in the tail column.
@item algebra.outercrossproduct
@tab Returns the cross product
@item algebra.outerjoin
@tab Returns all the result of a join, plus the BUNS formed NIL in 
        the tail and the head-values of 'outer' whose tail-value does 
        not match an head-value in 'inner'.
@item algebra.position
@tab Returns the position of the value pair It returns an 
        error if 'val' does not exist.
@item algebra.product
@tab Gives the product of all tail values
@item algebra.project
@tab Fill the tail column with a constant.
@item algebra.sample
@tab Produce a random selection of size 'num' from the input BAT.
@item algebra.sdifference
@tab Returns the difference taken over *both* columns of two BATs. 
        Results in all BUNs of 'left' that are *not* in 'right'. 
        Does *not* do double-elimination over the 'left' BUNs. 
        If you want this, use:
	     'sdifference(left.sunique,right.sunique)' 
	or: 'sdifference(left,right).sunique'.
@item algebra.select
@tab Select all BUNs of a BAT with a certain 
	tail value. Selection on NIL is also 
	possible (it should be properly casted, 
	e.g.:int(nil)).
@item algebra.selectH
@item algebra.semijoin
@tab Patch to enable semijoin over void/oid columns
@item algebra.sintersect
@tab Returns the intersection taken over *both* columns of two BATs. 
        Results in all BUNs of 'left' that are also in 'right'. Does *not* 
        do double-elimination over the 'left' BUNs, If you want this, use:
	 'sintersect(sunique(left),sunique(right))' 
	or: 'sunique(sintersect(left,right))'.
@item algebra.slice
@tab Return the slice with the BUNs at position x till y.
@item algebra.sort
@tab Returns a BAT copy sorted on the head column.
@item algebra.sortHT
@tab Returns a lexicographically sorted copy.
@item algebra.sortT
@tab Returns a BAT copy sorted on the tail column.
@item algebra.sortTH
@tab Returns a reverse lexicographically sorted copy.
@item algebra.split
@tab Split head into two values
@item algebra.sum
@tab Gives the sum of all tail values
@item algebra.sunion
@tab Returns the union of two BATs; looking at both columns of both BATs.
        Results in all BUNs of 'left' that are  not in 'right', plus all 
        BUNs of 'right'.  *no* double-elimination is done. 
        If you want this, do:
	 'sunion(left.sunique,right.sunique)' 
	or: 'sunion(left,right).sunique'.
@item algebra.sunique
@tab Select unique tuples from the input BAT. Double elimination is 
        done over BUNs as a whole (head and tail).  Result is a BAT 
	with real set() semantics.
@item algebra.thetajoin
@tab Theta join on for 'mode' in ( LE, LT, EQ, GT, GE ).  JOIN_EQ is 
        just the same as join(). All other options do merge algorithms. 
        Either using the fact that they are ordered() already (left on tail, 
	right on head), or by using/creating binary search trees on the 
        join columns. 
@item algebra.topN
@tab Trim all but the top N tuples.
@item algebra.tunique
@tab Select unique tuples from the input BAT. Double elimination is 
        done over the BUNs tail. The result is a BAT with property
		tkeyd()== true
@item algebra.uhashsplit
@tab Same as hashsplit, but only collect the head values in the fragments
@item algebra.union
@item algebra.unique
@item algebra.uselect
@tab Value select, but returning only the 
	head values. SEE ALSO:select(bat,val)
@item
@item array.grid
@tab Fills an index BAT, (grpcount,grpsize,clustersize,offset)
and shift all elemenets with a factor s
@item array.print
@tab Prints an array, using 1 value bat and N aligned index bats
@item array.product
@tab Produce an array product
@item array.project
@tab Fill an array representation with constants 
@item
@item bat.append
@tab Special case append for empty bats, works around impossible 
        void,void case
@item bat.delete
@tab Delete from the first BAT all BUNs with a corresponding BUN 
        in the second.
@item bat.getAccess
@tab return the access mode attached to this BAT as a character.
@item bat.getAlpha
@tab Obtain the list of BUNs added
@item bat.getBatSize
@tab A version of BATsize that does not require loading the BAT.
@item bat.getCapacity
@tab Returns the current allocation size (in max number of elements) of a BAT.
@item bat.getDelta
@tab Obtain the list of BUNs deleted
@item bat.getHeadType
@tab Returns the type of the head column of a BAT, as an integer type number.
@item bat.getHeat
@tab Return the current BBP heat (LRU stamp)
@item bat.getName
@tab Gives back the logical name of a BAT.
@item bat.getRole
@tab Returns the rolename of the head column of a BAT.
@item bat.getSequenceBase
@tab Get the sequence base for the void column of a BAT.
@item bat.getTailType
@tab Returns the type of the tail column of a BAT, as an integer type number.
@item bat.hasAppendMode
@tab return true if to this BAT is append only.
@item bat.hasReadMode
@tab return true if to this BAT is read only.
@item bat.hasWriteMode
@tab return true if to this BAT is read and write.
@item bat.info
@tab Produce a BAT containing info about a BAT in [attribute,value] format. 
        It contains all properties of the BAT record. See the BAT documentation 
        in GDK for more information.
@item bat.insert
@tab Insert a value in a 'void' bat
@item bat.isCached
@tab Bat is stored in main memory.
@item bat.isPersistent
@item bat.isSorted
@tab Returns whether a BAT is ordered on head or not.
@item bat.isSortedReverse
@tab Returns whether a BAT is ordered on head or not.
@item bat.isSynced
@tab Tests whether two BATs are synced or not. 
@item bat.isTransient
@item bat.isaKey
@tab return whether the head column of a BAT is unique (key).
@item bat.isaSet
@tab return whether the BAT mode is set to unique.
@item bat.load
@tab Load a particular BAT from disk
@item bat.mirror
@tab Returns the head-mirror image of a BAT (two head columns).
@item bat.new
@tab Localize a bat by name and produce a variant
@item bat.pack
@tab Pack a pair into a BAT
@item bat.replace
@tab inplace replace values on the given locations
@item bat.reverse
@tab Returns the reverse view of a BAT (head is tail and tail is head).
        BEWARE  no copying is involved; input and output refer to the 
        same object!
@item bat.revert
@tab Puts all BUNs in a BAT in reverse order.  (Belongs to the 
        BAT sequence module)
@item bat.save
@tab Save a BAT to storage, if it was loaded and dirty.  
        Returns whether IO was necessary.  Please realize that 
	calling this function violates the atomic commit protocol!!
@item bat.setAccess
@tab Try to change the update access priviliges 
	to this BAT. Mode:
	 r[ead-only]      - allow only read access.
	 a[append-only]   - allow reads and update.
	 w[riteable]      - allow all operations.
	BATs are updatable by default. On making a BAT read-only, 
        all subsequent updates fail with an error message.Returns 
        the BAT itself.
@item bat.setAppendMode
@tab Change access privilige of BAT to append only
@item bat.setCold
@tab Makes a BAT very cold for the BBP. The chance of being choses 
        for swapout is big, afterwards.
@item bat.setColumn
@tab Give both columns of a BAT a new name.
@item bat.setGarbage
@tab Designate a BAT as garbage
@item bat.setHash
@item bat.setHot
@tab Makes a BAT very hot for the BBP. The chance of being chosen for 
        swapout is small, afterwards.
@item bat.setKey
@tab Sets the 'key' property of the head column to 'mode'. In 'key' mode, 
        the kernel will silently block insertions that cause a duplicate 
        entries in the head column. KNOWN BUG:when 'key' is set to TRUE, this 
	function does not automatically eliminate duplicates. 
        Use b := b.kunique;
@item bat.setMemoryAdvise
@tab alias for madvise(b,mode,mode,mode, mode,mode)
@item bat.setMemoryMap
@tab Alias for mmap(b,mode,mode,mode, mode,mode)
@item bat.setName
@tab Give a logical name to a BAT. 
@item bat.setPersistent
@tab Make the BAT persistent.  Returns boolean which indicates 
        if the BAT administration has indeed changed.
@item bat.setReadMode
@tab Change access privilige of BAT to read only
@item bat.setRole
@tab Give a logical name to the columns of a BAT.
@item bat.setSequenceBase
@tab Set the sequence base for the void column of a BAT.
@item bat.setSet
@tab Sets the 'set' property on this BAT to 'mode'. In 'set' mode, 
        the kernel will silently block insertions that cause a duplicate 
        BUN [head,tail] entries in the BAT.  KNOWN BUG:when 'set' is set 
        to TRUE, this function does not automatically eliminate duplicates. 
        Use b := b.sunique; Returns the BAT itself.
@item bat.setSorted
@tab Assure BAT is ordered on the head.
@item bat.setTransient
@tab Make the BAT transient.  Returns 
	boolean which indicates if the
BAT administration has indeed changed.
@item bat.setWriteMode
@tab Change access privilige of BAT to read and write
@item bat.unload
@tab Swapout a BAT to disk. Transient BATs can also be swapped out.     
        Returns whether the unload indeed happened. 
@item bat.unpack
@tab Extract the first tuple from a bat
@item
@item batcalc.!=
@item batcalc.%
@tab Binary BAT calculator function with accumulator BAT result
@item batcalc.*
@tab Binary BAT calculator function with accumulator BAT result
@item batcalc.+
@tab Binary BAT calculator function with accumulator BAT result
@item batcalc.++
@tab Unary minus over the tail of the bat
@item batcalc.-
@tab Unary minus over the tail of the bat
@item batcalc.--
@tab Unary minus over the tail of the bat
@item batcalc./
@tab Binary BAT calculator function with accumulator BAT result
@item batcalc.<
@item batcalc.<=
@item batcalc.==
@item batcalc.>
@item batcalc.>=
@item batcalc.and
@item batcalc.dbl
@tab Coerce an dbl tail to a bat with dbl tail.
@item batcalc.flt
@tab Coerce an dbl tail to a bat with flt tail.
@item batcalc.ifthen
@tab Ifthen operation to assemble a conditional result 
@item batcalc.ifthenelse
@tab Ifthen operation to assemble a conditional result 
@item batcalc.init
@tab Initialize a BAT with a tail constant
@item batcalc.int
@tab Coerce an oid tail to a bat with int tail.
@item batcalc.lng
@tab Coerce an oid tail to a bat with lng tail.
@item batcalc.not
@tab Return a BAT with the negated tail
@item batcalc.oid
@tab Materialize the oid into an oid
@item batcalc.or
@item batcalc.project
@tab Fill the head with a constant, e.g. [0~b]
@item batcalc.sht
@tab Coerce an oid tail to a bat with sht tail.
@item batcalc.xor
@tab Binary BAT calculator function with accumulator BAT result
@item
@item batcolor.blue
@tab Extracts blue component from a color atom
@item batcolor.cb
@tab Extracts Cb(blue color) component from a color atom
@item batcolor.color
@tab Converts string to color
@item batcolor.cr
@tab Extracts Cr(red color) component from a color atom
@item batcolor.green
@tab Extracts green component from a color atom
@item batcolor.hsv
@tab Converts an HSV triplets to a color atom
@item batcolor.hue
@tab Extracts hue component from a color atom
@item batcolor.luminance
@tab Extracts Y(luminance) component from a color atom
@item batcolor.red
@tab Extracts red component from a color atom
@item batcolor.rgb
@tab Converts an RGB triplets to a color atom
@item batcolor.saturation
@tab Extracts saturation component from a color atom
@item batcolor.str
@tab Identity mapping for string bats
@item batcolor.value
@tab Extracts value component from a color atom
@item
@item batmath.acos
@item batmath.asin
@item batmath.atan
@item batmath.atan2
@item batmath.ceil
@item batmath.cos
@item batmath.cosh
@item batmath.exp
@item batmath.fabs
@item batmath.floor
@item batmath.fmod
@item batmath.log
@item batmath.log10
@item batmath.pow
@item batmath.sin
@item batmath.sinh
@item batmath.sqrt
@item batmath.tan
@item batmath.tanh
@item
@item batstr.+
@tab Concatenate a string to a bat of strings.
@item batstr.==
@tab Equate a bat of strings against a singleton
@item batstr.bytes
@tab Return the string length in bytes.
@item batstr.chrAt
@tab String array lookup operation.
@item batstr.endsWith
@tab Suffix check.
@item batstr.length
@tab Return the length of a string.
@item batstr.ltrim
@tab Strip whitespaces from start of a string.
@item batstr.match
@tab POSIX pattern matching against a string BAT
@item batstr.r_search
@tab Reverse search for a substring. Returns position, -1 if not found.
@item batstr.rtrim
@tab Strip whitespaces from end of a string.
@item batstr.search
@tab Search for a substring. Returns position, -1 if not found.
@item batstr.startsWith
@tab Prefix check.
@item batstr.str
@tab Identity mapping for string bats
@item batstr.string
@tab Return substring s[offset..offset+count] of a string s[0..n]
@item batstr.substitute
@tab Substitute first occurrence of 'src' by
	'dst'.  Iff repeated = true this is
	repeated while 'src' can be found in the
	result string. In order to prevent
	recursion and result strings of unlimited
	size, repeating is only done iff src is
	not a substring of dst.
@item batstr.toLower
@tab Convert a string to lower case.
@item batstr.toUpper
@tab Convert a string to upper case.
@item batstr.trim
@tab Strip whitespaces around a string.
@item batstr.unicodeAt
@tab get a unicode character (as an int) from a string position.
@item
@item bbp.bind
@tab Locate the BAT using its BBP index
@item bbp.close
@tab Close the bbp box.
@item bbp.commit
@tab Commit updates for this client
@item bbp.deposit
@tab Enter a new bat into the bbp box.
@item bbp.destroy
@tab Schedule a BAT for removal at session end or immediately
@item bbp.discard
@tab Remove the BAT from the box
@item bbp.getCount
@tab Create a BAT with the cardinalities of all known BATs
@item bbp.getDirty
@tab Create a BAT with the dirty/ diffs/clean status
@item bbp.getHeadType
@tab Map a BAT into its head type
@item bbp.getHeat
@tab Create a BAT with the heat values
@item bbp.getKind
@tab Create a BAT with the persistency status
@item bbp.getLRefCount
@tab Utility for debugging MAL interpreter
@item bbp.getLocation
@tab Create a BAT with their disk locations
@item bbp.getName
@tab Map a BAT into its internal name
@item bbp.getNames
@tab Map BAT into its bbp name
@item bbp.getObjects
@tab View of the box content.
@item bbp.getRNames
@tab Map a BAT into its bbp physical name
@item bbp.getRefCount
@tab Utility for debugging MAL interpreter
@item bbp.getStatus
@tab Create a BAT with the disk/load status
@item bbp.getTailType
@tab Map a BAT into its tail type
@item bbp.iterator
@tab Locates the next element in the box
@item bbp.open
@tab Locate the bbp box and open it.
@item bbp.prelude
@tab Initialize the bbp box
@item bbp.release
@tab Remove the BAT from further consideration
@item bbp.releaseAll
@tab Commit updates for this client
@item bbp.take
@tab Load a particular bat
@item bbp.toString
@tab Get the string representation of an element in the box
@item
@item blob.nitems
@tab  get the number of bytes in this blob.
@item blob.null
@item blob.toblob
@tab store a string as a blob.
@item blob.tostring
@tab get the bytes from blob as a string,
	 starting at byte 'index' till the first 
	0 byte or the end of the blob.
@item
@item box.close
@tab Close the box 
@item box.deposit
@tab Enter a new value into the box
@item box.destroy
@tab Destroy the box 
@item box.discard
@tab Release the BAT from the client pool
@item box.getBoxNames
@tab Retrieve the names of all boxes
@item box.iterator
@tab Locates the next element in the box
@item box.open
@tab Locate the box and open it 
@item box.release
@tab Release the BAT from the client pool
@item box.releaseAll
@tab Release all objects for this client
@item box.take
@tab Locates the typed value in the box
@item box.toString
@tab Get the string representation of 
	the i-th element in the box
@item
@item bstream.create
@tab create a buffered stream
@item bstream.destroy
@tab destroy bstream
@item bstream.read
@tab read at least size bytes into the buffer of s
@item
@item calc.!=
@item calc.%
@item calc.*
@item calc.+
@tab Concatenate two strings
@item calc.-
@tab negative value
@item calc./
@item calc.<
@item calc.<<
@item calc.<=
@item calc.==
@item calc.>
@item calc.>=
@item calc.>>
@item calc.abs
@tab absolute value
@item calc.and
@item calc.bat
@item calc.between
@item calc.bit
@tab coercion dbl to bit
@item calc.chr
@tab coercion lng to chr
@item calc.dbl
@tab coercion lng to dbl
@item calc.flt
@tab coercion lng to flt
@item calc.getBAT
@tab Coerce bat to BAT identifier
@item calc.getBATidentifier
@tab Coerce bat to BAT identifier
@item calc.ifthenelse
@item calc.int
@tab coercion dbl to int
@item calc.inv
@tab inverse value (1/x)
@item calc.isnil
@tab is a value nil?
@item calc.isnotnil
@tab is a value not equal to nil?
@item calc.lng
@tab coercion dbl to lng
@item calc.max
@item calc.min
@item calc.newoid
@tab Reserves a range of consecutive unique OIDs; returns the lowest 
        in range.  equivalent to newoid(0,incr)
@item calc.not
@item calc.oid
@tab coercion int to oid
@item calc.or
@item calc.ptr
@tab coercion lng to ptr
@item calc.setoid
@tab Equivalent to setoid(1:oid).
@item calc.sht
@tab coercion dbl to sht
@item calc.str
@tab coercion dbl to str
@item calc.void
@item calc.xor
@item
@item chop.getHead
@tab return the BUN head value using the cursor.
@item chop.getTail
@tab return the BUN tail value using the cursor.
@item chop.hasMoreChunks
@tab Produce the next chunk for processing.
@item chop.hasMoreElements
@tab Produce the next bun for processing.
@item chop.newChunkIterator
@tab  Create an iterator with fixed granule size.
	  The result is a view.
@item chop.newIterator
@tab Process the buns one by one.
@item
@item clients.clearDebug
@tab Clear the flag in the debugging bitset
@item clients.getId
@tab return a number that unique represents
  	the current client
@item clients.getInfo
@tab Pseudo bat with client attributes
@item clients.getLogins
@tab Pseudo bat of client login time
@item clients.getScenario
@tab Retrieve current scenario name
@item clients.getUsers
@tab Pseudo bat of users logged in
@item clients.quit
@tab Terminate the session for this client
@item clients.setDebug
@tab Set the flag in the debugging bitset.
	See configuration file and documentation
@item clients.setHistory
@tab Designate console history file
@item clients.setListing
@tab Turn on/off echo of MAL instructions:
	2 - show mal instruction,
	4 - show type resolutoin, 
	8 - show binding information
@item clients.setScenario
@tab Switch to other scenario handler, return previous one
@item
@item color.blue
@tab Extracts blue component from a color atom
@item color.cb
@tab Extracts Cb(blue color) component from a color atom
@item color.color
@tab Converts string to color
@item color.cr
@tab Extracts Cr(red color) component from a color atom
@item color.green
@tab Extracts green component from a color atom
@item color.hsv
@tab Converts an HSV triplets to a color atom
@item color.hue
@tab Extracts hue component from a color atom
@item color.luminance
@tab Extracts Y(luminance) component from a color atom
@item color.print
@item color.printf
@item color.red
@tab Extracts red component from a color atom
@item color.rgb
@tab Converts an RGB triplets to a color atom
@item color.saturation
@tab Extracts saturation component from a color atom
@item color.str
@tab Converts color to string 
@item color.value
@tab Extracts value component from a color atom
@item color.ycc
@tab Converts an YCC triplets to a color atom
@item
@item const.close
@tab Close the constant box 
@item const.deposit
@tab Enter a new variable into the box
@item const.destroy
@tab Destroy the box
@item const.discard
@tab Release the const from the box
@item const.hasMoreElements
@tab Locate next element in the box
@item const.newIterator
@tab Locate next element in the box
@item const.open
@tab Locate and open the constant box
@item const.prelude
@tab Initialize the const box
@item const.release
@tab Release a new constant value
@item const.releaseAll
@tab Release all variables in the box
@item const.take
@tab Take a variable out of the box
@item const.toString
@tab Get the string representation of an element in the box
@item
@item crackers.crack
@tab Break the partitions into smaller pieces
	using a join over the tail
@item crackers.drop
@tab Garbage collect the piece representation
@item crackers.dropView
@tab Garbage collect the piece representation.
	Should be a side-effect of dropping the bat!
@item crackers.getPiece
@tab Retrieve a piece of a cracked BAT into a known BAT view.
@item crackers.hasMoreElements
@tab Retrieve the next piece of a cracked
	BAT by adjusting the BAT view descriptor.
	It returns the next valid piece id.
	A value zero means 'end-of-sequence'
@item crackers.info
@tab Print the cracker index administration
@item crackers.new
@tab Create the index tables for a cracked
	table. Set the minimum granularity
@item crackers.newIterator
@tab Retrieve the first piece of a cracked
	BAT as a BAT view and also return the
	identity of the next piece.
@item crackers.select
@tab Retrieve the subset using a cracker
	index producing preferably a BATview.
@item crackers.selectPieces
@tab Retrieve identities of all pieces that qualify the selection criterion.
@item
@item date.!=
@tab Equality of two dates
@item date.<
@tab Equality of two dates
@item date.<=
@tab Equality of two dates
@item date.=
@tab Equality of two dates
@item date.>
@tab Equality of two dates
@item date.>=
@tab Equality of two dates
@item date.isnil
@tab Nil test for date value
@item
@item daytime.!=
@tab Equality of two daytimes
@item daytime.<
@tab Equality of two daytimes
@item daytime.<=
@tab Equality of two daytimes
@item daytime.=
@tab Equality of two daytimes
@item daytime.>
@tab Equality of two daytimes
@item daytime.>=
@tab Equality of two daytimes
@item daytime.isnil
@tab Nil test for daytime value
@item
@item factory.getCaller
@tab Retrieve the unique identity
        of the factory caller
@item factory.getLocations
@tab Retrieve the location of all
        known plants
@item factory.getOwners
@tab Retrieve the factory owners table
@item factory.getPlants
@tab Retrieve the factory plant description
        for all operational factories
@item factory.getTimeStampIn
@tab Retrieve the time stamp it was
        received by the factory
@item factory.getTimeStampOut
@tab Retrieve the time stamp the answer
        was returned to the client
@item factory.setLocation
@tab Set the location of the plant
        manager.
@item factory.shutdown
@tab Close a factory
@item
@item group.avg
@tab grouped tail average
@item group.count
@tab grouped count
@item group.group
@tab Cross tabulation group extension step.  Returned head values are 
        identical as in 'ct'. Tail values are from the same domain and 
        indicate further refinement of the groups in 'ct', taking into 
        account also the tail-values in 'attr'.
@item group.max
@tab grouped tail maximum
@item group.min
@tab grouped tail minimum
@item group.prelude
@item group.refine
@tab refine the ordering of a tail-ordered BAT by sub-ordering on the 
        values of a second bat 'a' (where the heads of a and b match 1-1).
        The effect of this is similar to (hash-based) GRPderive, with the 
        distinction that the group ids respect the ordering of the group 
        values.
@item group.size
@tab grouped count of true values
@item group.sum
@tab Tail sum of groups of a sliding window of fixed size
@item
@item inspect.getAtomNames
@tab Collect a BAT with the atom names
@item inspect.getAtomSizes
@tab Collect a BAT with the atom sizes
@item inspect.getAtomSuperNames
@tab Collect a BAT with the atom names
@item inspect.getDefinition
@tab Returns a string representation 
	of a specific function
@item inspect.getFunction
@tab Obtain the function name
@item inspect.getKind
@tab Obtain the instruction kind
@item inspect.getModule
@tab Obtain the function name
@item inspect.getSignature
@tab Returns the function signature(s)
@item inspect.getType
@tab Return the type of a variable (expression)
@item inspect.getTypeName
@item
@item io.export
@tab Export a BAT as ASCII to a file. If the 'filepath' is not absolute, it
 is put into the .../dbfarm/$DB directory. Success of failure is indicated.
@item io.ftable
@tab Print an n-ary table to a file.
@item io.import
@tab Import a BAT from an ASCII dump. The new tuples are *inserted* into the
 parameter BAT. You have to create it! Its signature must match the dump,
 else parsing errors will occur and FALSE is returned.
@item io.print
@tab Print a MAL value tuple .
@item io.printf
@item io.printft
@tab Select default format 
@item io.prompt
@tab Print a MAL value without brackets.
@item io.stderr
@tab return the error stream for the database console
@item io.stdin
@tab return the input stream to the database client
@item io.stdout
@tab return the output stream for the database client
@item io.table
@tab Print an n-ary table.
@item
@item lock.create
@tab Create an unset lock
@item lock.destroy
@tab Destroy a lock
@item lock.set
@tab Try to set a lock; if set, 
	block till it is freed
@item lock.tostr
@tab Overloaded atom function
@item lock.try
@tab Try a lock, if free set it, 
	if not return EBUSY
@item lock.unset
@tab Unset a lock
@item
@item mal.assert
@tab Check a property
@item mal.call
@tab Evaluate a program stored in a BAT
@item mal.newRange
@tab This routine introduces an iterator
	over a scalar domain.
@item mal.nextElement
@tab Advances the iterator with a fixed value
	until it becomes >= last.
@item mal.raise
@tab Raise an exception labeled 
	with a specific message.
@item mal.register
@tab Compile the code string and register it as a MAL function
@item mal.source
@tab Merge the instructions stored in the 
	file with the current program
@item
@item manual.create
@tab Produces a XML-formatted manual over all modules loaded.
@item manual.createHelp
@tab Produces a manual with help lines grouped by module.
@item manual.createOverview
@tab Produces an overview of all functions grouped by module.
@item manual.help
@tab Collect the comments for a given function pattern
@item
@item mapi.epilogue
@item mapi.listen
@tab Start the Mapi listener on <port> for <maxusers>. 
	For a new client connection MAL procedure <cmd>(Stream s_in, Stream s_out)
	is called.If no <cmd> is specified a new client thread is forked.
@item mapi.listen_ssl
@tab Start the Mapi listener on <port> for <maxusers> using SSL. 
	<keyfile> and <certfile> give the path names for files with the 
	server key and certificates in PEM format. For a new client connection 
	MAL procedure <cmd>(Stream s_in, Stream s_out) is called.
	If no <cmd> is specified a new client thread is forked.
@item mapi.prelude
@item mapi.resume
@tab Resume the interaction with a specific client thread
@item mapi.stop
@tab Terminate all sessions of by a client
@item mapi.suspend
@tab Suspend a client interactiont using a
         user-supplied session key.  The session
         is broken when the timer (in seconds)
         for the reconnect expires.
@item mapi.trace
@tab Trace (on/off) receipt of messages for all users
@item
@item mdb.List
@tab Dump the routine M.F on standard out.
@item mdb.getDefinition
@tab Returns a string representation of the current function 
	with typing information attached
@item mdb.getExceptionContext
@tab extract the context string from the exception message
@item mdb.getExceptionReason
@tab extract the reason from the exception message
@item mdb.getExceptionVariable
@tab extract the variable name from the exception message
@item mdb.getStackDepth
@tab Return the depth of the calling stack.
@item mdb.getStackFrame
@tab Collect variable binding of current (n-th) stack frame.
@item mdb.getStackTrace
@item mdb.inspect
@tab Run the debugger on a specific function
@item mdb.list
@tab Dump the routine M.F on standard out.
@item mdb.setCatch
@tab Turn on/off catching exceptions
@item mdb.setTimer
@tab Turn on/off performance timer for debugger
@item mdb.setTrace
@tab Turn on/off tracing of current routine
@item mdb.start
@tab Start interactive debugger
@item mdb.stop
@tab Stop the interactive debugger
@item mdb.var
@tab Dump the symboltable of routine M.F on standard out.
@item
@item mmath.acos
@tab The acos(x) function calculates the arc cosine of x, that is the 
	value whose cosine is x. The value is returned in radians and is 
	mathematically defined to be between 0 and PI (inclusive).
@item mmath.asin
@tab The asin(x) function calculates the arc sine of x, that is the value 
	whose sine is x. The value is returned in radians and is mathematically 
	defined to be between -PI/20 and -PI/2 (inclusive).
@item mmath.atan
@tab The atan(x) function calculates the arc tangent of x, that is the value 
	whose tangent is x. The value is returned in radians and is mathematically 
	defined to be between -PI/2 and PI/2 (inclusive).
@item mmath.atan2
@tab The atan2(x,y) function calculates the arc tangent of the two 
        variables x and y.  It is similar to calculating the arc
	tangent of y / x, except that the signs of both arguments are 
        used to determine the quadrant of the result.  The value is 
	returned in radians and is mathematically defined to be between 
        -PI/2 and PI/2 (inclusive).
@item mmath.ceil
@tab The ceil(x) function rounds x upwards to the nearest integer.
@item mmath.cos
@tab The cos(x) function returns the cosine of x, where x is given in 
        radians. The return value is between -1 and 1.
@item mmath.cosh
@tab The cosh() function  returns the hyperbolic cosine of x, which is 
	defined mathematically as (exp(x) + exp(-x)) / 2.
@item mmath.exp
@tab The exp(x) function returns the value of e (the base of 
        natural logarithms) raised to the power of x.
@item mmath.fabs
@tab The fabs(x) function  returns  the  absolute value of the 
        floating-point number x.
@item mmath.finite
@tab The finite(x) function returns true if x is neither infinite 
        nor a 'not-a-number' (NaN) value, and false otherwise.
@item mmath.floor
@tab The floor(x) function rounds x downwards to the nearest integer.
@item mmath.fmod
@tab The fmod(x,y) function computes the remainder of dividing x by y.
	The return value is x - n * y, where n is the quotient of x / y,
	rounded towards zero to an integer.
@item mmath.isinf
@tab The isinf(x) function returns -1 if x represents negative 
        infinity, 1 if x represents positive infinity, and 0 otherwise.
@item mmath.isnan
@tab The isnan(x) function returns true if x is 'not-a-number' 
        (NaN), and false otherwise.
@item mmath.log
@tab The log(x) function returns the natural logarithm of x.
@item mmath.log10
@tab The log10(x) function returns the base-10 logarithm of x.
@item mmath.pow
@tab The pow(x,y) function  returns the value of x raised to the power of y.
@item mmath.rand
@tab return a random number
@item mmath.round
@tab The round(n, m) returns n rounded to m places to the right 
        of the decimal point; if m is omitted, to 0 places. m can be 
	negative to round off digits left of the decimal point. 
        m must be an integer.
@item mmath.sin
@tab The sin(x) function returns the cosine of x, where x is given in 
        radians. The return value is between -1 and 1.
@item mmath.sinh
@tab The sinh() function  returns  the  hyperbolic sine of x, which 
        is defined mathematically as (exp(x) - exp(-x)) / 2.
@item mmath.sqrt
@tab The sqrt(x) function returns the non-negative square root of x.
@item mmath.srand
@tab initialize the rand() function with a seed
@item mmath.tan
@tab The tan(x) function returns the tangent of x,
        where x is given in radians
@item mmath.tanh
@tab The tanh() function returns the hyperbolic tangent of x, which is 
	defined mathematically as sinh(x) / cosh(x).
@item
@item mtime.add
@tab returns the timestamp that comes 'msecs' 
	(possibly negative) after 'value'.
@item mtime.adddays
@tab returns the date after a number 
	of days (possibly negative).
@item mtime.addmonths
@tab returns the date after a number of 
	months (possibly negative).
@item mtime.addyears
@tab returns the date after a number 
	of years (possibly negative).
@item mtime.compute
@tab compute the date from a rule in a given year
@item mtime.current_date
@item mtime.current_time
@item mtime.current_timestamp
@item mtime.date
@tab extracts date from timestamp in a 
	specific timezone.
@item mtime.date_add_month_interval
@tab Add months to a date
@item mtime.date_add_sec_interval
@tab Add seconds to a date
@item mtime.date_sub_sec_interval
@tab Subtract seconds from a date
@item mtime.day
@tab extract day from rule.
@item mtime.dayname
@tab Returns day name from a number 
	between [1-7], str(nil) otherwise.
@item mtime.daynum
@tab Returns number of day [1-7] from a 
	string or nil if does not match any.
@item mtime.dayofweek
@tab Returns the current day of the week 
	where 1=sunday, .., 7=saturday
@item mtime.dayofyear
@tab Returns N where d is the Nth day 
	of the year (january 1 returns 1)
@item mtime.daytime
@tab default time with zeroed components
@item mtime.diff
@tab returns the number of milliseconds 
	between 'val1' and 'val2'.
@item mtime.dst
@tab return whether DST holds in the 
	timezone at a certain point of time.
@item mtime.end_dst
@tab extract rule that determines 
	end of DST from tzone.
@item mtime.hours
@tab extracts hour from daytime
@item mtime.milliseconds
@tab extracts milliseconds from daytime
@item mtime.minutes
@tab extract minutes from rule.
@item mtime.month
@tab extract month from rule.
@item mtime.monthname
@tab Returns month name from a number 
	between [1-12], str(nil) otherwise.
@item mtime.monthnum
@tab Returns month number [1-12] from a string
	 or nil if does not match any.
@item mtime.msecs
@tab convert date components to milliseconds
@item mtime.olddate
@tab create a date from the old instant 
	format.
@item mtime.oldduration
@tab parse the old duration format and 
	return an (estimated) number of days.
@item mtime.prelude
@item mtime.rule
@tab create a DST start/end date rule.
@item mtime.seconds
@tab extracts seconds from daytime
@item mtime.start_dst
@tab extract rule that determines 
	start of DST from tzone.
@item mtime.time_synonyms
@tab Allow synonyms for the parse format of 
	date/timestamp.
@item mtime.timestamp
@tab creates a timestamp from (d,dt) parameters (in the local timezone).
@item mtime.timezone
@tab Test and set the timezone.
@item mtime.tzone
@tab create a tzone as an hour difference 
	from GMT and a DST.
@item mtime.tzone_local
@tab get the local tzone; which is used for printing timestamps
@item mtime.weekday
@tab extract weekday from rule.
@item mtime.weekofyear
@tab Returns the week number in the year.
@item mtime.year
@tab extracts year from date (nonzero 
	value between -5867411 and +5867411).
@item
@item optimizer.aliasRemoval
@tab Alias removal optimizer
@item optimizer.clrDebug
@item optimizer.commonExpressionRemoval
@tab Common subexpression optimizer
@item optimizer.costEstimation
@tab Estimate the cost of a relational expression
@item optimizer.deadCodeRemoval
@tab Dead code optimizer
@item optimizer.dumpQEP
@tab Produce an indented tree visualisation
@item optimizer.emptySet
@tab Move constant expressions out of the blocks
@item optimizer.expressionAccumulation
@tab Replace calculations with accumulator model
@item optimizer.factorize
@tab Turn function into a factory
@item optimizer.garbageCollector
@tab Garbage collector optimizer
@item optimizer.macroContraction
@tab Inliner of a specific function
@item optimizer.macroExpansion
@tab Inliner of a specific function
@item optimizer.multiplex
@tab Compiler for multiplexed instructions.
@item optimizer.optimize
@tab Optimize a specific operation
@item optimizer.partitionedQuery
@tab Experiment with partitioned databases
@item optimizer.peephole
@tab Perform local rewrites
@item optimizer.prelude
@tab Initialize the optimizer
@item optimizer.reduce
@tab Estimate the cost of a relational expression
@item optimizer.setDebug
@item optimizer.showFlowGraph
@tab Dump the data flow of the function 
	M.F in a format recognizable by the 
	command 'dot' on the file s
@item optimizer.showPlan
@tab Illustrate the plan derived so far
@item optimizer.singleton
@tab Perform singleton optimization
@item optimizer.strengthReduction
@tab Move constant expressions out of the loop
@item
@item partitions.close
@tab Save and close the partition box 
@item partitions.compress
@tab Compress the group to remove oid holes
@item partitions.delete
@tab Delete a BAT from the partition
@item partitions.deposit
@tab Enter a new BAT into the partition box
@item partitions.destroy
@tab Destroy the partition box
@item partitions.discard
@tab Release a BAT variable from the box
@item partitions.dump
@item partitions.getLastPartition
@tab Obtain the last partition for update
@item partitions.getRange
@tab Obtain the oid range for a partition
@item partitions.hasMoreElements
@tab Localize the next partition for processing.
@item partitions.insert
@tab Add a BAT as a partition to the end of the list.
@item partitions.newIterator
@tab Create an iterator over the BAT partitions.
@item partitions.open
@tab Locate and open the partition box
@item partitions.prelude
@item partitions.release
@tab Release a single BAT with its partitions from the  box
@item partitions.releaseAll
@tab Release all partitions in the box
@item partitions.setCapacity
@tab Limit the content of all remaining BATs
@item partitions.take
@tab Take a partition from the box
@item partitions.toString
@tab Get the string representation of an element in the box
@item
@item pcre.compile
@tab compile a pattern
@item pcre.match
@tab POSIX pattern matching against a string
@item pcre.null
@item pcre.select
@tab Select tuples based on the pattern
@item pcre.uselect
@tab Select tuples based on the pattern, only returning the head
@item
@item profiler.activate
@tab Make the specified counter active.
@item profiler.clearTrace
@tab Clear the profiler tables
@item profiler.closeStream
@tab Stop sending the event records
@item profiler.clrFilter
@tab Clear the performance trace bit 
	of the selected functions.
@item profiler.deactivate
@tab Deactivate the counter
@item profiler.dumpTrace
@tab List the events collected
@item profiler.getTrace
@tab Get the trace details of a specific event
@item profiler.openStream
@tab Send the log events to a file 
@item profiler.setAll
@tab Short cut for setFilter(*,*).
@item profiler.setCachedProfiling
@tab use cached events rather then online
@item profiler.setEndPoint
@tab End performance tracing after mod.fcn
@item profiler.setFilter
@tab Generate an event record for all 
	function calls that satisfy the regular 
	expression mod.fcn. A wildcard (*) can 
	be used as name to identify all
@item profiler.setNone
@tab Short cut for clrFilter(*,*).
@item profiler.setOfflineProfiling
@tab Sent events over stream
@item profiler.setOnlineProfiling
@tab Sent events over stream
@item profiler.setStartPoint
@tab Start performance tracing at mod.fcn
@item profiler.start
@tab Start performance tracing
@item profiler.startTrace
@tab Prepare for online tracing using the profile filter
@item profiler.stop
@tab Stop performance tracing
@item profiler.stopTrace
@tab Stop online tracing
@item
@item rule.define
@tab Introduce a synomym timezone rule.
@item
@item sema.create
@tab Create an unset sema, with an initial value
@item sema.destroy
@tab Destroy a semaphore
@item sema.down
@tab Decrement the semaphpore if >0; else block
@item sema.up
@tab Increment the semaphore
@item
@item
@item statistics.close
@tab Close the statistics box 
@item statistics.deposit
@tab Enter a new BAT into the statistics box
@item statistics.destroy
@tab Destroy the statistics box
@item statistics.discard
@tab Release a BAT variable from the box
@item statistics.dump
@tab Display the statistics table
@item statistics.forceUpdate
@tab Bring the statistics up to date for one BAT
@item statistics.getCount
@tab Return latest stored count information
@item statistics.getHistogram
@tab Return the latest histogram
@item statistics.getHotset
@tab Return a table with BAT names that have been touched
since the start of the session
@item statistics.getMax
@tab Return latest stored maximum information
@item statistics.getMin
@tab Return latest stored minimum information
@item statistics.getObjects
@tab Return a table with BAT names managed
@item statistics.getSize
@tab Return latest stored count information
@item statistics.hasMoreElements
@tab Locate next element in the box
@item statistics.newIterator
@tab Locate next element in the box
@item statistics.open
@tab Locate and open the statistics box
@item statistics.prelude
@tab Initialize the statistics package
@item statistics.release
@tab Release a single BAT from the  box
@item statistics.releaseAll
@tab Release all variables in the box
@item statistics.take
@tab Take a variable out of the statistics box
@item statistics.toString
@tab Get the string representation of an element in the box
@item statistics.update
@tab Check for stale information
@item
@item status.cpuStatistics
@tab Global cpu usage information
@item status.gdkEnv
@tab Pseudo bat to map thread to name
@item status.gdkThread
@tab Pseudo bat to map thread to name
@item status.ioStatistics
@tab Global IO activity information
@item status.memStatistics
@tab Global memory usage information
@item status.memUsage
@tab Get a split-up of how much memory 
	 blocks are in use.
@item status.mem_cursize
@tab the amount of physical swapspace in KB that is currently in use
@item status.mem_maxsize
@tab set the maximum usable amount of physical swapspace in KB
@item status.vmUsage
@tab Get a split-up of how much virtual 
	 memory blocks are in use.
@item status.vm_cursize
@tab the amount of logical VM space in KB that is currently in use
@item status.vm_maxsize
@tab set the maximum usable amount of physical swapspace in KB
@item
@item str.+
@tab Concatenate two strings.
@item str.STRprelude
@item str.chrAt
@tab String array lookup operation.
@item str.codeset
@tab Return the locale's codeset
@item str.endsWith
@tab Suffix check.
@item str.iconv
@tab String codeset conversion
@item str.length
@tab Return the length of a string.
@item str.ltrim
@tab Strip whitespaces from start of a string.
@item str.nbytes
@tab Return the string length in bytes.
@item str.r_search
@tab Reverse search for a char. Returns 
	 position, -1 if not found.
@item str.rtrim
@tab Strip whitespaces from end of a string.
@item str.search
@tab Search for a character. Returns 
	 position, -1 if not found.
@item str.startsWith
@tab Prefix check.
@item str.str
@tab Noop routine.
@item str.string
@tab Return substring s[offset..offset+count] 
	of a string s[0..n]
@item str.substitute
@tab Substitute first occurrence of 'src' by 
	'dst'.  Iff repeated = true this is 
	repeated while 'src' can be found in the 
	result string. In order to prevent 
	recursion and result strings of unlimited 
	size, repeating is only done iff src is 
	not a substring of dst.
@item str.toLower
@tab Convert a string to lower case.
@item str.toUpper
@tab Convert a string to upper case.
@item str.trim
@tab Strip whitespaces around a string.
@item str.unicode
@tab convert a unicode to a character.
@item str.unicodeAt
@tab get a unicode character 
	(as an int) from a string position.
@item
@item stream.blocked
@tab open a block based stream
@item stream.close
@tab close and destroy the stream s
@item stream.flush
@tab flush the stream
@item stream.openRead
@tab convert an ascii stream to binary
@item stream.openReadBytes
@tab open a file stream for reading
@item stream.openWrite
@tab convert an ascii stream to binary
@item stream.openWriteBytes
@tab open a file stream for writing
@item stream.readInt
@tab read integer data from the stream
@item stream.readStr
@tab read string data from the stream
@item stream.socketRead
@tab open ascii socket stream for reading
@item stream.socketReadBytes
@tab open a socket stream for reading
@item stream.socketWrite
@tab open ascii socket stream for writing
@item stream.socketWriteBytes
@tab open a socket stream for writing
@item stream.writeInt
@tab write data on the stream
@item stream.writeStr
@tab write data on the stream
@item
@item tablet.display
@tab Display a formatted table
@item tablet.dump
@tab Print all pages with header to a stream
@item tablet.finish
@tab Free the storage space of the report descriptor
@item tablet.firstPage
@tab Produce the first page of output
@item tablet.getPage
@tab Produce the i-th page of output
@item tablet.getPageCnt
@tab Return the size in number of pages
@item tablet.header
@tab Display the minimal header for the table
@item tablet.input
@tab Load a bat using specific format.
@item tablet.lastPage
@tab Produce the last page of output
@item tablet.load
@tab Load a bat using specific format.
@item tablet.nextPage
@tab Produce the next page of output
@item tablet.output
@tab Send the bat to an output stream.
@item tablet.page
@tab Display all pages at once without header
@item tablet.prevPage
@tab Produce the prev page of output
@item tablet.setColumn
@tab Bind i-th output column to a variable
@item tablet.setColumnBracket
@tab Format the brackets around a field
@item tablet.setColumnDecimal
@tab Set the scale and precision for numeric values
@item tablet.setColumnName
@tab Set the display name for a given column
@item tablet.setColumnNull
@tab Set the display format for a null value for a given column
@item tablet.setColumnPosition
@tab Set the character position to use for this field when loading according to 
	fixed (punch-card) layout.
@item tablet.setColumnWidth
@tab Set the maximal display witdh for a given column. All values exceeding 
	the length are simple shortened without any notice.
@item tablet.setDelimiter
@tab Set the column separator.
@item tablet.setFormat
@tab Initialize a new reporting structure.
@item tablet.setPivot
@tab The pivot bat identifies the tuples of interest. The only requirement 
        is that all keys mentioned in the pivot tail exist in all BAT parameters 
        of the print comment. The pivot also provides control over the order 
        in which the tuples are produced.
@item tablet.setProperties
@tab Define the set of properties
@item tablet.setRowBracket
@tab Format the brackets around a row
@item tablet.setStream
@tab Redirect the output to a stream.
@item tablet.setTableBracket
@tab Format the brackets around a table
@item
@item thread.exec
@tab Run a function independently
@item thread.isDead
@tab Check availability of a child thread
@item thread.kill
@tab Kill a specific thread
@item thread.suspend
@tab suspend a processing thread
@item thread.terminate
@tab Attempt a soft kill of a thread
@item thread.wait
@tab Wait for all threads to be finished
@item
@item timestamp.!=
@tab Equality of two timestamps
@item timestamp.<
@tab Equality of two timestamps
@item timestamp.<=
@tab Equality of two timestamps
@item timestamp.=
@tab Equality of two timestamps
@item timestamp.>
@tab Equality of two timestamps
@item timestamp.>=
@tab Equality of two timestamps
@item timestamp.epoch
@tab unix-time (epoch) support: seconds since epoch
@item timestamp.isnil
@tab Nil test for timestamp value
@item timestamp.unix_epoch
@tab The Unix epoch time (00:00:00 UTC on January 1, 1970)
@item
@item transaction.abort
@tab abort changes in certain BATs.
@item transaction.alpha
@tab List insertions since last commit.
@item transaction.clean
@tab declare a BAT clean without 
	 flushing to disk.
@item transaction.commit
@tab commit changes in certain BATs.
@item transaction.delta
@tab List deletions since last commit.
@item transaction.sync
@tab save all persistent BATs
@item
@item tzone.str
@item tzone.timestamp
@tab Utility function to create a timestamp from a number of seconds since the Unix epoch
@item
@item unix.getenv
@tab Get the environment variable string.
@item unix.setenv
@tab Set the environment variable string.
@item
@item url.getAnchor
@tab Extract the URL anchor (reference)
@item url.getBasename
@tab Extract the URL base file name
@item url.getContent
@tab Get the URL resource in a local file
@item url.getContext
@tab Get the path context of a URL 
@item url.getDirectory
@tab Extract directory names from the URL
@item url.getDomain
@tab Extract Internet domain from the URL
@item url.getExtension
@tab Extract the file extension of the URL
@item url.getFile
@tab Extract the last file name of the URL
@item url.getHost
@tab Extract the server name from the URL
@item url.getPort
@tab Extract the port id from the URL
@item url.getProtocol
@tab Extract the protocol from the URL
@item url.getQuery
@tab Extract the query string from the URL
@item url.getQueryArg
@tab Extract argument mappings from the URL
@item url.getRobotURL
@tab Extract the location of the robot 
	control file
@item url.getUser
@tab Extract the user identity from the URL
@item url.isaURL
@tab Check conformity of the URL syntax
@item url.newurl
@tab Construct URL from protocol, host,and file
@item url.url
@tab Create an URL from a string literal
@item
@item user.main
@end multitable
