@subsection Mapi Client Calling Arguments

The @value{mclient} program is the universal command-line tool that implements the MAPI protocol for client-server interaction
with MonetDB.
On a Linux platform it provides readline
functionality, which greatly improves user interaction.
A history can be maintained to ease interaction over multiple
sessions.

A @value{mclient} requires minimally a language and host or 
port argument. The default setting is geared
at establing a guest connection to a SQL or XQuery database at a default
server running on the localhost.
The @code{ -h hostname} specifies on which machine the MonetDB server 
is running.  If you communicate with a MonetDB server on the same 
machine, it can be omitted.


The timer switch reports on the round-about time for
queries sent to the server. It provides a first impression
on the execution cost.
@example
@value{mclient} [ options ]
@end example
Options are:
@verbatim
 -D          | --dump           /* dump sql database */
 -e          | --error          /* exit on error */
 -H          | --history        /* load/save cmdline history (default off) */
 -h hostname | --host=hostname  /* host to connect to */
 -i          | --interactive    /* read stdin after command line args */
 -l<language>| --language=lang  /* {mal,sql,xquery} */
 -P<passwd>  | --passwd=passwd  /* password */
 -p portnr   | --port=portnr    /* port to connect to */
 -q          | --quiet          /* don't print welcome message [default=on]*/
 -s stmt     | --statement=stmt /* run single statement */
 -T          | --time           /* time individual commands */
 -t          | --trace          /* trace Monet interaction */
 -u<user>    | --user=user      /* user id [default=monetdb] */
 -?          | --help           /* show this usage message */
 -s xqmode     /*xquery serialization mode {xml,dm} */
@end verbatim

@ifset XQmanual
Thus, passing @code{-l xquery} (or shorter: @code{-lxq}) will cause
the query @code{script} to be executed as an XQuery.
@end ifset

The default @code{mapi_port} TCP port used is @code{50000}. If this port
happens to be in use on the server machine (which generally is only the 
case if you run two MonetDB servers on it), you will have 
to use the @code{ -p port} switch. Otherwise, it may also be omitted.
Note that the default port (and other default options) can be set in the
server configuration file.
