@chapter The MAL Modules
This section contains a synopsis of the modules being shipped
and which use knowledge  of the MAL runtime context.
They are sorted by module name and repetitive reading may
be required to understand all details.
@c * ALG extensions :: Extensions to the kernel/algebra module.
@menu
* BAT extensions:: Extensions to the kernel/bat module.
* BBP:: BAT buffer pool interface.
* Box:: Box variable interface.
* Chopper:: Break a collection into chunks.
* Clients:: Client record inspection.
* Constants:: Global system defined values.
* Factory:: Factory management interface.
* Inspect:: Inspect the runtime symbol table(s).
* I/O:: The input/output interface.
* Language:: MAL language extension features.
* MDB :: MAL debugger interface.
* Manual:: Inspect and produce manual material.
* Mserver:: MonetDB server interface.
* MAT :: Multiple association tables.
* PBM:: Dealing with partitioned BATS.
* Profiler:: Performance profiler.
* PCRE:: Regular expression handling over strings.
* Result Sets:: Result set interface.
* Statistics:: A server-side statistics catalog.
* Table:: Table output interface.
*Transactions:: Transaction interface.
@end menu

@table @emph
@c @item algExtensions 
@c Extensions to the kernel/algebra module.
@item batExtensions
Extensions to the kernel/bat module.
@item BBP
BAT buffer pool interface.
@item Box
Box variable interface.
@item Chopper
Break a collection into chunks.
@item Clients
Client record inspection.
@item Constants
Global system defined values.
@item Factory
Factory management interface.
@item Inspect
Inspect the runtime symbol table(s).
@item I/O
The input/output interface.
@item Language
MAL language extension features.
@item MDB 
MAL debugger interface.
@item Manual
Online manual material.
@item Mserver
MonetDB server interface.
@item MAT 
Multiple association tables.
@item PBM
Dealing with partitioned BATS.
@item Profiler
Performance profiler.
@item PCRE
Regular expression handling over strings.
@item Result Sets
Result set interface.
@item Statistics
A server-side statistics catalog.
@item Table
Table output interface.
@item Transactions
Transaction interface
@end table
