@section MonetDB PHP Library
The MonetDB distribution comes with a Mapi-based interface 
for @url{http://www.php.net,PHP}. It consists of two parts: the dynamically
loadable PHP module, MonetDB.so/dll and a driver for the @url{http://pear.php.net/package/DB,PEAR::DB} abstraction interface, MonetDB.php. 

@subsection Installation
The unix configure process tries to detect if you have PHP 
including developer packages installed and builds the PHP module only 
the those circumstances. With the @code{ --with-php}
option you could tell 'configure' where to find the PHP installation.

For windows setups the story is a little bit more complex.
TODO

When the build process is complete you should have a PHP extension_dir under
your MonetDB prefix directory. Usually this is @emph{<prefix>/lib/php4}.
In addition,  the PEAR::DB driver should be installed under
@emph{<prefix>/php_peardir/db},
which usually is available in @emph{<prefix>/share/pear/db}.
Depending on your local PHP setup you could now use these files by coping them
into the system @emph{extension_dir} and @emph{php_peardir}
or with a private webserver
you could simply reset the environment variables, include_path and
extension_dir. For example you could have a @code{php.ini}
file which has the following PHP section.

@verbatim
[PHP]
safe_mode = Off
safe_mode_gid = Off
include_path = ".:/opt/MonetDB-4.6/share/pear:/usr/share/pear"
extension_dir = /opt/MonetDB-4.6/lib/php4
@end verbatim

@subsection A Tiny PHP Example

@verbatim
<?php
/* Connecting to MonetDB */
$link = monetdb_connect()
    or die("Could not connect : " . monetdb_error());
echo "Connected successfully";

/* Executing MIL query */
$query = "ls;";
$result = monetdb_query($query) 
    or die("Query failed : " . monetdb_error());

/* Printing results in HTML */
echo "<table>\n";
while ($line = monetdb_fetch_row()) {
    echo "\t<tr>\n";
    foreach ($line as $col_value) {
        echo "\t\t<td>$col_value</td>\n";
    }
    echo "\t</tr>\n";
}
echo "</table>\n";

/* Closing connection */
monetdb_close();
?>
@end verbatim

@subsection PHP MonetDB functions
The PEAR::DB driver is based on the MonetDB PHP module which can
ofcourse also be used directly. It supports the following instructions:

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@item monetdb_affected_rows  @tab 
@item monetdb_close  @tab Close MonetDB connection
@item monetdb_connect  @tab Open a connection to a MonetDB Server
@item monetdb_data_seek  @tab 
@item monetdb_errno  @tab  Returns the numerical value of the error message from previous MonetDB operation
@item monetdb_error  @tab  Returns the text of the error message from previous MonetDB operation
@item monetdb_escape_string  @tab 
@item monetdb_fetch_array  @tab  Fetch a result row as an both associative array and numeric array.
@item monetdb_fetch_assoc  @tab  Fetch a result row as an associative array
@item monetdb_fetch_object  @tab Fetch a result row as an object
@item monetdb_fetch_row  @tab Get a result row as an enumerated array
@item monetdb_field_len  @tab 
@item monetdb_field_name  @tab  Get the name of the specified field in a result
@item monetdb_field_table  @tab 
@item monetdb_field_type  @tab  Get the type of the specified field in a result
@item monetdb_free_result  @tab 
@item monetdb_info  @tab 
@item monetdb_next_result  @tab 
@item monetdb_num_fields  @tab Get number of fields in result
@item monetdb_num_rows  @tab Get number of rows in result
@item monetdb_ping  @tab 
@item monetdb_query  @tab Send a query to MonetDB server
@end multitable
  
Check out the PHP documentation for more details on these functions.
