@section Release Check-list
Preparing the MonetDB software for distribution 
requires actions of developers and first-line users. 
Steps in this process are easily forgotten. The list below
acts as a short (quality) checklist, inspired by the alpha release
of MonetDB Version 5.

The release cycle consists of a few steps:
@itemize
@item @emph{Release Target}
A 'proto-release' letter is sent to the developers list.
It describes the packages in broad terms and the time-frame
of the actions taken.
@item @emph{Feature Freeze}
when development of new features is frozen.
@item @emph{Quality Assurance} 
a 2-3 week period where outstanding bugs are resolved
and documentation is the main focus of attention.
@item @emph{Packeging}
when the products to be shipped are compiled and assembled
for the target platforms.
@item @emph{Beer Time} 
When all items have been properly addressed and shortcomings
reported (as far as known), the packages can be released to
the public.
@end itemize

These steps involve a repetitive cycle with the following
ingredients.
@itemize
@item @emph{Product List}
The products to be shipped and left out should be clearly
identified. Experimental code should preferably not be
released at all.
@item @emph{Green Test Web}
A (alpha) release should preferably be based on a complete
@emph{green} testweb. This requires owners of the source modules
to spent time to fix them or remove sections from the release.
@item @emph{Manual Tool Tests}
Graphical user interfaces, such as AquaDataStudio, require
manual tests. This involves downloading their latest version
and walking carefully through the documentation to assess
compliance.
@item @emph{Web Management}
A complete walkthrough of the website is needed to assure
correctness and completeness of the information.
@end itemize
