@subsection Dump and restore
Before you upgrade your database server you should backup the data.
Start the server and textual client as usual.

In client, type the following three commands. Type them without any extra white space:

	  sql>>path/to/dump.sql
	  sql>\D
	  sql>>
    

That is, first a line consisting of a greater than symbol followed by the absolute (!) path name of the file in which you want to store the dump. This will redirect future output to the file mentioned. Then a line consisting of just backslash-capital D. This command does the actual dump which is, because of the previous line, stored in the dump file. And finally a line with just a greater than symbol. This closes the file and redirects the output again to the screen.

[Note: if you don't use the absolute path name of a file, the file is
created in the directory where the Client was started.
On Windows this is at the location where the program was installed,
and therefore using an absolute path name is highly recommended.]

It is also possible to dump from the command line.
Start a server, and then issue the following command:

@ifset SQLmanual
@example
MapiClient -lsql -umonetdb -Pmonetdb --dump > dump.sql
@end example
@end ifset
    
@ifset Mmanual
@example
mclient -lsql -umonetdb -Pmonetdb --dump > dump.sql
@end example
@end ifset
    
This command will connect to the SQL Server and dump the database 
into the file dump.sql in the current directory.

Now that the database is dumped, you can safely upgrade to the new version.
This is described in the installation sections.

The database is restored from the dumpfiles as follows:
Start the server and client as usual.
In the client, type the following command:
@example
	  sql><path/to/dump.sql
@end example

That is, a less than symbol followed by the absolute (!) path name of the dump file that was produced using the dump instructions.

It is also possible to restore from the command line. Start a SQL Server, and then issue the command:

@ifset SQLmanual
@example
MapiClient -lsql -umonetdb -Pmonetdb < dump.sql
@end example
@end ifset
    
@ifset Mmanual
@example
mclient -lsql -umonetdb -Pmonetdb < dump.sql
@end example
@end ifset
    
