<h3>Getting Started</h3>
<p>
Next, initialize a client, for instance the JdbcClient utility:
</p>
<pre class="code">
% java -jar share/MonetDB/lib/MonetDB_JDBC.jar -umonetdb
password: &lt;monetdb&gt;

Welcome to the MonetDB interactive JDBC terminal!
Database: MonetDB 4.8.2
Driver: MonetDB Native Driver 1.2 (Blunt-SR1)
Type \q to quit, \h for a list of available commands
auto commit mode: on
monetdb-&gt;
</pre>
<p>
The world of SQL is now available to the user:
</p>
<pre class="code">
monetdb-&gt; SELECT 'Hello SQL, here I come' AS "message";
+------------------------+
| message                |
+========================+
| Hello SQL, here I come |
+------------------------+
1 row

monetdb-&gt;
</pre>
<p>


</p>
<h2>Introduction on the VOC data set</h2>
<p>
Exploring the wealth of functionality offered by MonetDB is best
started using a toy database.  An example of such database is the VOC data
set that provides a peephole view into the administrative
system of a multi-national company, the <i>Vereenigde geoctrooieerde Oostindische
Compagnie</i> (VOC for short - The (Dutch) East Indian Company).
</p>
<p>
The VOC was granted a monopoly on the trade in the East Indies on March 20, 1602
by the representatives of the provinces of the Dutch republic.
Attached to this monopoly was the duty to fight the enemies of the Republic and 
prevent other European nations to enter the East India trade.
During its history of over 200 years, the VOC became the largest company of its kind, 
trading spices like nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon, pepper, and other consumer
products like tea, silk and Chinese porcelain.
Her factories or trade centers were world famous: Desjima in Japan,
Mokha in Yemen, Surat in Persia and of course Batavia,
the Company's headquarters on Java.
</p>
<p>
The history of the VOC is an active area of research and
a focal point for multi-country heritage projects, e.g. 
<a href="http://www.tanap.net/content/voc/organization/organization_intro.htm" target="_blank">TANAP</a>,
which includes a short historic overview of the VOC written by
world expert on the topic F. Gaastra.
The archives of the VOC are spread around the world, but a large
contingent still resides in the
<a href="http://www.nationaalarchief.nl/" target="_blank">National Archive</a>,
The Hague.
The archives comprise over 25 million historical records.
Much of which has not (yet) been digitized.
</p>
<p>
The MonetDB/SQL tutorial is based on the material published in the book 
J.R. Bruijn, F.S. Gaastra and I. Schaar, <i>Dutch-Asiatic Shipping in the 17th
and 18th Centuries</i>, which gives an account of the trips made to the East
and ships returned safely (or wrecked on the way).  A total of 8000 records
are provided.  They include information about ship name and type, captain,
the arrival/departure of harbors along the route, personnel accounts, 
and anecdotal information.
</p>
<p>


</p>
<h3>Acquiring and loading the VOC data set</h3>
<p>
The VOC data set can be downloaded from
<a href="_ROOTURL_/Assets/">the MonetDB Assets site</a> as a
gzipped file with SQL statements.
After the zipfile has been extracted, the file should be loaded into MonetDB
via either the Java based <tt>JdbcClient</tt> utility, or the <tt>MapiClient</tt> C-program.
Alternatively, the URL to the VOC data file can be supplied to the
<tt>JdbcClient</tt> utility, which then directly reads from the URL.
</p>
<p>
Before you load the VOC data set, it is advised to first add a different user
with its own schema to the MonetDB database.
Assuming you have started MonetDB with SQL module, one might add a user like this:
</p>
<pre class="code">
Welcome to the MonetDB interactive JDBC terminal!
Database: MonetDB 4.8.0
Driver: MonetDB Native Driver 1.1 (Rise)
Type \q to quit, \h for a list of available commands
auto commit mode: on
monetdb-&gt; CREATE USER "voc" WITH PASSWORD 'voc' NAME 'VOC Explorer' SCHEMA "sys";
Operation successful
 
monetdb-&gt; CREATE SCHEMA "voc" AUTHORIZATION "voc";
Operation successful
 
monetdb-&gt; ALTER USER "voc" SET SCHEMA "voc";
Operation successful
 
monetdb-&gt; \q
</pre>
<p>
To illustrate the use of the newly created account and schema, the following example
connects and creates a table, which is dropped afterwards.
</p>
<pre class="code">
% java -jar share/MonetDB/lib/MonetDB_JDBC.jar -u voc
password: &lt;voc&gt;
  
Welcome to the MonetDB interactive JDBC terminal!
Database: MonetDB 4.8.0
Driver: MonetDB Native Driver 1.1 (Rise)
Type \q to quit, \h for a list of available commands
auto commit mode: on
voc-&gt; START TRANSACTION;
auto commit mode: off
voc-&gt; CREATE TABLE test (
voc-(   id int,
voc-(   data varchar(30)
voc-( );
Operation successful

voc-&gt; \d
TABLE   voc.test
voc-&gt; \d test
CREATE TABLE "voc"."test" (
        "id"   int(19),
        "data" varchar(30)
);
voc-&gt; ROLLBACK;
auto commit mode: on
voc-&gt; \d
voc-&gt;
</pre>
<p>
Importing the <tt>voc_dump.sql</tt> file into the database can be done using one of
the following program calls:
</p>
<pre class="code">
% java -jar share/MonetDB/lib/MonetDB_JDBC.jar -u voc -f voc_dump.sql -Xbatching 400
password: &lt;voc&gt;

% java -jar share/MonetDB/lib/MonetDB_JDBC.jar -u voc -f http://monetdb.cwi.nl/Assets/VOC/voc_dump.sql.gz -Xbatching 400
password: &lt;voc&gt;

% bin/MapiClient -l sql -u voc &lt; voc_dump.sql
</pre>
<p>


</p>
<h3>Exploring the VOC data set</h3>
<p>
As mentioned before, the VOC data set contains data for around 8000 voyages.
</p>
<pre class="code">
voc-&gt; \d
TABLE   voc.craftsmen
TABLE   voc.impotenten
TABLE   voc.invoices
TABLE   voc.passengers
TABLE   voc.seafarers
TABLE   voc.soldiers
TABLE   voc.total
TABLE   voc.voyages
voc-&gt; select count(*) from voyages;
+--------------+
| count_number |
+==============+
| 8115         |
+--------------+
1 row
</pre>
<p>
The set consists of 8 tables, which are all bound to each other using FOREIGN KEY
relationships.  The voyages table is considered to be the main table, which all
others reference to.  Every table, except <tt>invoices</tt> has a PRIMARY KEY defined
over the columns <tt>number</tt> and <tt>number_sup</tt>.  Since the <tt>invoices</tt>
table holds zero or more invoices per voyage (identified by <tt>number</tt>,
<tt>number_sub</tt>) a PRIMARY KEY constraint is not possible.
</p>
<p>
The tables <tt>craftsmen</tt>, <tt>importenten</tt>, <tt>passengers</tt>,
<tt>seafarers</tt>, and <tt>soldiers</tt> all share the same columns. We can define a
VIEW that combines them all into one big table, to make them easier to access.
</p>
<pre class="code">
voc-&gt; CREATE VIEW onboard_people AS
voc-&gt; SELECT * FROM (
voc-(    SELECT 'craftsmen' AS type, craftsmen.* FROM craftsmen
voc-(    UNION ALL
voc-(    SELECT 'impotenten' AS type, impotenten.* FROM impotenten
voc-(    UNION ALL
voc-(    SELECT 'passengers' AS type, passengers.* FROM passengers
voc-(    UNION ALL
voc-(    SELECT 'seafarers' AS type, seafarers.* FROM seafarers
voc-(    UNION ALL
voc-(    SELECT 'soldiers' AS type, soldiers.* FROM soldiers
voc-(    UNION ALL
voc-(    SELECT 'total' AS type, total.* FROM total
voc-( ) AS onboard_people_table;
Operation successful
</pre>
<p>
The new view will show up and we can just use it as a normal table, to for instance
calculate the number of records for each group of people:
</p>
<pre class="code">
voc-&gt; \d
TABLE   voc.craftsmen
TABLE   voc.impotenten
TABLE   voc.invoices
TABLE   voc.passengers
TABLE   voc.seafarers
TABLE   voc.soldiers
TABLE   voc.total
TABLE   voc.voyages
VIEW    voc.onboard_people
voc-&gt; SELECT type, COUNT(*) AS total FROM onboard_people GROUP BY type ORDER BY type;
+------------+----------+
| type       | total    |
+============+==========+
| craftsmen  | 2349     |
| impotenten | 938      |
| passengers | 2813     |
| seafarers  | 4468     |
| soldiers   | 4177     |
| total      | 2454     |
+------------+----------+
5 rows
 
voc-&gt; select count(*) from impotenten;
+--------------+
| count_number |
+==============+
| 938          |
+--------------+
1 row
</pre>
<p>
It is possible to play with the set in many ways, to find out several things that
took place during the voyages of the ships, or the money that was earned.  A few
examples are shown below.
</p>
<pre class="code">
voc-&gt; SELECT COUNT(*) FROM voyages WHERE particulars LIKE '%_recked%';
+--------------+
| count_number |
+==============+
| 358          |
+--------------+
1 row
 
voc-&gt; SELECT chamber, CAST(AVG(invoice) AS integer) AS average
voc-&gt; FROM invoices
voc-&gt; WHERE invoice IS NOT NULL
voc-&gt; GROUP BY chamber
voc-&gt; ORDER BY average DESC;
+---------+----------+
| chamber | average  |
+=========+==========+
| A       | 282996   |
| Z       | 259300   |
| H       | 150182   |
| R       | 149628   |
| D       | 149522   |
| E       | 149518   |
| &lt;NULL&gt;  | 83309    |
+---------+----------+
7 rows
 
voc-&gt; CREATE VIEW extended_onboard AS SELECT number, number_sup, trip, trip_sup, onboard_at_departure, death_at_cape, left_at_cape, onboard_at_cape, death_during_voyage, onboard_at_arrival, death_during_voyage - left_at_cape AS death_at_arrival FROM onboard_people;
Operation successful
 

</pre>
<p>


</p>
<h3>MonetDB/SQL features</h3>
<p>
Although the SQL'99 and SQL'03 from the basis of the MonetDB/SQL implementation,
any SQL implementation contains several implementor defined features.
In this section we illustrate the defiances from the standard and 
the convenience functions.
</p>
<h4>SQL variables</h4>
<p>
The SQL implementation comes with a small collection of global variables.
Their value can be changed with the {\sc set} statement.
The following environment variables are currently defined:
\begin{itemize}
\item {\sc auto\_commit} takes a boolean value and toggles the
auto commit mode for SQL statements.
\item {\sc history}
\item {\sc explain} takes on as values 'plan',...
\item {\sc debug} toggles the internal debug flag. Its value is an
integer. A description of possible values can be found in the MonetDB
configuration file. 
\end{itemize}

</p>
<h4>Atomary types</h4>
<p>
[need to tell something on there implementation limitations.]
</p>
<h4>Statement modifiers</h4>
<p>
Any SQL statement can be prepended with a statement modifier, 
which is a hint to the compiler or interpreter to change its role.
The following modifiers are currently supported:
\begin{itemize}
\item {\sc explain}, returns the query execution plan in MIL statements.
The query is not executed. This modifier is used to develop and debug
optimizers, but also a good indicator of the query complexity.
\item {\sc profile}, executes the query and stores profiling information
in the predefined table 'history'. It provides useful hints on where
the system is actually spending its time.
\item{\sc prepare/exec} work together and can be used by client
programs to implement a PREPARE and EXECUTE functionality.
After the prepare phase, the query has been optimized and stored in
the SQL query cache. Subsequent calls with different parameters are
simple captured and the cached plan is used.
\end{itemize}

EXPLAIN, PROFILE and PREPARE/EXEC. Explain returns the query execution plan as a MIL program and the query is not executed. PROFILE executes the query and stores profiling information in the 'history' table. The prepare and execute work together and can be used by the client programs to implement PREPARE and EXECUTE functionality.
</p>
<h4>Modules and external functions</h4>
<p>
</p>
<h4>Overlaying the BAT storage</h4>
<p>
The SQL implementation exploits many facilities of the underlying
MonetDB kernel. Most notably, its efficient column-wise storage
scheme with associated algebraic primitives. 
However, this kernel can also be programmed directly using the
MonetDB Interpreter Language (MIL), which provides a much richer
set of operators then strictly necessary for a correct implementation
and execution of SQL.
</p>
<p>
Although the BATs used for SQL storage can be manipulated directly
at the MIL layer, it is strongly discouraged. For, SQL uses a
rather complex administration to realise transaction safety.
Working at the MIL layer directly could easily compromise
the integrity of the system as a whole.
</p>
<p>
However, there are cases where access to a collection of BATs from
the SQL environment can be handy. For example, to inspect some
of the system tables maintained in the kerne.
This functionality is realised using an variation of the {\sc view
statement}. It is best illustrated with a short example.
</p>
<p>
First, create in the MonetDB the BATs of interest. Only void-BATs are allowed
and the user should guarantee that they are aligned. 
<pre>
var a:=new(void,int);
var b:=new(void,str);
a.seqbase(oid(0));
b.seqbase(oid(0));
a.persists(true);
b.persists(true);
a.rename("age");
b.rename("name");
</pre>
These BATs can be filled with attribute values, but make sure
that all BATs are given an equal number of tuples.
To conclude, commit the database to disk, whereafter the BATs
become available to SQL, once you restart Mserver/SQL.
<pre>
a.insert(oid(nil), 32);
b.insert(oid(nil), "John");
a.insert(oid(nil), 31);
b.insert(oid(nil), "Mary");
commit();
</pre>
The BATs are made visible for read-only access using the a column 
specification. As it normally expects identifiers, we have to use
double quotes instead.
<pre>
CREATE VIEW friends ("age","name") AS BATS;
</pre>
At this point the content of the BATs can be queried 
using ordinary SQL queries. Updates are prohibited.
</p>
<h3>Background information about the VOC data set</h3>
<p>
The introduction given below is an OCR version from the book:
J.R. Bruijn, F.S. Gaastra and I. Schaar, <i>Dutch-Asiatic Shipping in the 17th and 18th Centuries</i>
</p>
<p>
This book presents tables which give a virtually complete survey of the 
direct shipping between the Netherlands and Asia between 1595-1795.
This period contains, first, the voyages of the so-called Voorcompagnie&euml;n and,
then, those for and under control of the Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie (VOC).
The survey ends in 1795.
That year saw an end of the regular sailings of the VOC between the Netherlands
and Asia, since, following the Batavian revolution in January, the Netherlands
became involved in war with England. 
The last outward voyage left on 26 December 1794. 
After news of the changed situation in the Netherlands was received in Asia,
the last homeward voyage took place in the spring of 1795. 
The VOC itself was disbanded in 1798.
</p>
<p>
In total 66 voyages of the voorcompagnie&euml;n are listed, one more than 
the traditionally accepted number. The reconnaissance ship, POSTILJON, 
from the fleet of Mahu and De Cordes, that was collected en route 
is given its own number (0022). Since the attempt of the 
Australische Compagnie to circumvent the monopoly of the VOC can be 
considered as a continuation of the voorcompagnie&euml;n the voyage of 
Schouten and Le Maire is also listed (0196-0197).
For the rest, exclusively the outward and homeward voyages of the VOC 
are mentioned in the tables. Of those there were in total 4722 outward 
and 3359 homeward. The administration of the company was strictly followed, 
so that, for example, the voyage of Hudson in 1609 (0133) is listed,
but not that of Roggeveen in 1721-1722.
Voyages of East Indiamen that were driven off course, and arrived for 
instance in Surinam, or those which went no further than the Cape are 
mentioned, as opposed to those of warships of the five Admiralties which, 
from 1783, were sent to Asia to protect the fleets and possessions of the VOC.
</p>
<p>
The sources of the journeys consist primarily of the archives of the VOC in 
the Algemeen Rijksarchief in The Hague. They are, on the one hand,
the so-called 'Uitloopboeken' and ship registers, and, on the other, 
the 'Overgekomen Brieven en Papieren' (OBP's). The latter contain the 
regular reports on the arrival and departure of ships in Batavia and other 
Asiatic harbors. In addition, the 'Overgekomen Brieven van de Kaap de 
Goede Hoop' and some other, more dispersed sources must be mentioned
The data on the voyages of the voorcompagnie&euml;n derive above all from 
sources published by the Linschoten Vereeniging.
</p>
<p>
In volume I, the principal sources are described extensively and the origin 
of the information on each voyage is given. In addition, that volume 
contains an introduction on the organization of the VOC's shipping, 
which also includes an analysis and summary of the data presented in the tables.
Various other supplementary information, such as the value of the export 
from the Netherlands, only available by year, is also published there.
The tables follow closely the material presented in the major sources 
('Uitloopboeken' en OBP's). Since these sources are not uniform over a 
period of almost two centuries, the level of completeness of the 
information given for each voyage also varies.
</p>
<h3>Homeward voyage</h3>
<p>
During the compilation of the tables it became necessary in a few cases 
to add an A to some numbers. This occurred 5 times, in the following places:
5022, 5980, 5987, 6246 and 6649. 
Similarly in three cases a number had to be left open. 
The following numbers have not been used: 4605, 5027 and 8215.
The voyage number is followed by a figure which shows whether the ship is 
making its first, second or subsequent voyage. The outward and homeward 
voyages are counted separately. The first voyage from the Netherlands and 
the subsequent homeward voyages are both shown by a `1'.
Occasionally a ship was built or acquired in Asia. The first outward voyage 
of such a ship is considered as its second voyage. 
</p>
<h3>Ship's name</h3>
<p>
A uniform spelling has been chosen for the numerous variants given in the 
sources. In alphabetical ordering and in the index, the most relevant word 
was chosen. Thus the WAPEN VAN, HOORN (0243) is given under HOORN, 
the HOF NIET ALTIJD ZOMER (2380) under ZOMER and the 
VROUWE REBECCA JACOBA (3668) under REBECCA. It should be noted that especially 
in the seventeenth century ships' names were frequently provided 
with additions which were not used in a consistent fashion. 
The AMSTERDAM (0431) was sometimes called NIEUWAMSTERDAM, the WITTE OLIFANT 
(0533), the OLIFANT. The most frequent name is given in the tables. 
In the eighteenth century, especially, ships' names were frequently changed, 
or they used each other's names. This is always mentioned under the heading 
Particulars and in the index.
</p>
<h3>Master's name</h3>
<p>
Similarly, a uniform spelling has been chosen for the name of the master, 
generally schipper, but in the eighteenth century also a kapitein or 
kapiteinluitenant. The index is arranged by surname or patronymic. 
</p>
<h3>Tonnage</h3>
<p>
The volume of the ships is given in metric tons. The sources give the 
figures in lasten (1 last = 2 tons). After 1636, however, information 
in lasten is no longer of any value, as, for fiscal reasons, the VOC's 
figures were kept artificially low. From then on the volume has been 
calculated on the basis of the measurements of the ships, according to a 
simple formula (volume in lasten = length x breadth x depth in Amsterdam 
feet, divided by 200; 1 ft. = 28,3 cm). The results of this calculation 
have been doubled and are given in the tables. This method and the 
problems regarding the assessment of the ships' volume is described in 
Volume I. In a number of cases where inconsistent information was found, 
both calculations are given, thus e.g. 600/850. 
</p>
<h3>Type of ship</h3>
<p>
Occasionally, in those cases where this is mentioned in the sources, the 
type of the ship is given in the same column as the tonnage. In general, 
the most frequent type of ship, the retourschip (East Indiaman) is 
not mentioned in the sources. Therefore, where the type of ship is 
not mentioned, it may often be assumed that an East Indiaman is meant.
The various other types - hoeker, kat, pinas, jacht, fluit, paketboot - 
are given in Dutch.
</p>
<h3>Built</h3>
<p>
The year given in this column refers to the year in which the ship was built.
If the ship was hired or bought by the VOC, then this is mentioned in the
column, together with the year in which the transaction occurred.
</p>
<h3>Yard</h3>
<p>
The place is given where the ship was built. The chambers of the VOC had 
their own yard. 'A' refers to Amsterdam, 'Z' to Zeeland, 'D' to Delft, 'R' 
to Rotterdam, 'H' to Hoorn, and 'E' to Enkhuizen. When a ship was hired 
or bought by the VOC, the letter indicates the chamber that was responsible 
for the transaction.
The ships of the voorcompagnie&euml;n did not belong to a chamber. In these 
cases, 'A' indicates that a ship was built at an Amsterdam yard. 
The chambers also had no part in the buying or building of ships by 
the Hoge Regering in Batavia. In these cases the place of building 
or purchase in Asia is given.
</p>
<h3>Chamber</h3>
<p>
With the outward voyages, this column gives the chamber which equipped the ship;
with the homeward, the chamber to which the ship was addressed.
There is no entry in this column for ships organized by the voorcompagnie&euml;n.
</p>
<h3>Departure</h3>
<p>
Under this heading is given the date and place of departure from Europe, 
Asia or the Cape of Good Hope. A date like 03-02-1645 refers to 3 February 1645.
Where sailings from the Republic are concerned, the date given refers to 
the departure from the roads. Amsterdam, Hoorn and Enkhuizen ships generally 
left from Texel roads, Zeeland ships from the Wielingen or the 
roads of Rammekens, and Rotterdam and Delft ships from Goeree. 
Sometimes, ships were forced by storms or damage to return to the roads 
for a time or they sought shelter in one of the estuaries on the coast 
of Holland or Zeeland. Where possible, this is mentioned under the 
heading Particulars. In general the first date of departure is given in 
the tables, but in some cases, a later date has been chosen, in 
deference to the sources.
As for leaving Batavia, departure from the roads of the town was decisive, 
and not, as is frequently described in the Company papers, the reaching of 
the `open sea' after passing the Sunda Strait. Where departures from other 
Asian ports are concerned in general only the Company establishment 
from which the ship sailed is given. Thus Ceylon is mentioned in the columns, 
but it can be assumed that most ships left from the Bay of Galle, at 
the southern point of the island. China is given for ships which left from 
Canton, and the date refers to departure from the roads at Whampoa. 
Bengal is given for ships which left from the anchorage in the Ganges 
close to the VOC-establishment at Hughly.
</p>
<h3>Call at Cape</h3>
<p>
The data in this column give the arrival at (above) and the departure (below) 
from the Cape of Good Hope. In general no distinction is made between Table 
Bay and False Bay. Mention is made, when given in the sources, of ships 
which put in to the more northerly Saldanha and St. Helena Bays. When a 
ship sailed past the Cape, this is denoted by `no call'. When it is not 
known whether the ship stopped at the Cape at all - especially frequent before 
the foundation of the refreshment station there in 1652 - the column is 
left blank.
</p>
<h3>Arrival</h3>
<p>
The third column contains the date and place of arrival in Asia, Europe or, 
when that was the destination of the journey, at the Cape of Good Hope. 
The place of arrival is given in the same manner as that of departure, though,
in addition to the estuaries mentioned above, ships sometimes arrived in the 
Netherlands via the Vlie or at Delfzijl. The place of arrival in Asia 
refers to the establishment reached, unless the sources specify the actual port.
</p>
<h3>On board</h3>
<p>
It is possible to differentiate the number of those on board into various 
categories. For the outward journey, these are seafarers, soldiers, 
craftsmen, and passengers. The craftsmen are those who were employed to 
perform some particular service in Asia, and are thus not part of the crew 
as such. 'Passengers' is in fact a residual category, including high officials 
of the Company, including ministers of religion with their wives and servants, 
but also slaves and stowaways. Whenever such a differentiation is not possible,
which is especially the case in the early years, a figure for the total is 
given. Italics are used for this, or when the figures refer to more than 
one category. Only those categories are mentioned which were on board.
Therefore, when one category is mentioned, this implies that the others 
were not represented on board.
The sources for the return voyages are of a different kind and normally far 
less complete. They are totally absent for the journey between the Cape and 
the Netherlands. However, another category must be mentioned, namely 
the impotenten, who for various reasons were released from active service 
for the VOC and sent back to Europe. With regard to many voyages the sources 
only give the number of passengers and impotenten, and not the number of 
sailors and soldiers. Obviously, the absence of figures under these 
headings does not imply that there were none on board.
</p>
<p>
Information on the outward voyages is divided into six columns:
<table border="1" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="0">
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">I.</td>
  <td valign="top">onboard_at_departure</td>
  <td valign="top">The number on board at departure</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">II.</td>
  <td valign="top">death_at_cape</td>
  <td valign="top">The number dying between the Netherlands and the Cape. Frequently this
figure refers to all the categories together, even when the other information
is available per category. In such cases this figure is printed in italics.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">III.</td>
  <td valign="top">left_at_cape</td>
  <td valign="top">The number who leave the ship at the Cape.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">IV.</td>
  <td valign="top">onboard_at_cape</td>
  <td valign="top">The number who come on board at the Cape.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">V.</td>
  <td valign="top">death_during_voyage</td>
  <td valign="top">The number dying on the whole voyage. Subtraction of III from V gives the
number dying between the Cape and Asia.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">VI.</td>
  <td valign="top">onboard_at_arrival</td>
  <td valign="top">The number on board on arrival in Asia.</td>
</tr>
</table>
Three columns are given for the homeward voyages:
<table border="1" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="2">
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">I.</td>
  <td valign="top">onboard_at_departure</td>
  <td valign="top">The number on board at departure</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">II.</td>
  <td valign="top">death_at_cape</td>
  <td valign="top">The number dying en route to the Cape</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td align="right" valign="top">III.</td>
  <td valign="top">left_at_cape</td>
  <td valign="top">The number who went from board at the Cape</td>
</tr>
</table>
The figures in the various columns are taken from different sources which 
are not always consistent with each other. Therefore the figures on changes in 
the number of those on board during the voyages do not always tally with 
those on the size of the crew at departure and arrival.
</p>
<h3>Invoice value</h3>
<p>
For the return voyages, the total value of the ship's cargo, according to the 
invoice made up in Batavia or some other establishment, is given, as is the 
chamber for which the cargo was destined. Generally, this was for the chamber 
under whose jurisdiction the ship sailed, but occasionally a proportion of 
the cargo was for one or more of the other chambers.
</p>
<h3>Particulars</h3>
<p>
Under the last heading details deriving from the basic sources are given. 
They are generally incidental and as such not to be placed in one of the 
preceding columns. Because the sources are not the same across the whole 
period, and at times less complete, the extent and sort of material under 
this heading could not be consistent.
In so far as it is available, information deals with the ports of call on 
the journey, with the details of changes in the composition of the crew and 
with the eventual fate of the ship. For the return voyage, the name of the 
fleet-commander is generally given, and, after his name, the number of the 
ship he was on. Finally, where necessary, differences in data between 
various sources are indicated. Occasionally, particulars from a published 
source are added.
</p>
<h3>Corresponding number</h3>
<p>
This number, placed at the far right of the tables, denotes the next homeward 
voyage of the ship in volume II (naturally absent when the ship remains in 
Asia), or, in volume III, for homeward voyages, the number of the 
ship's previous outward voyage. In those cases where the ship was acquired in 
Asia, no corresponding number is given for the first homeward voyage from Asia.</br>
Due to the long duration of the preparation of these two volumes there are 
some inconsistencies in the text of the particulars and in the use of language.
</p>
